<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CANTO_X" name="CANTO_X"/>CANTO X.<br/>
			<br/>
			<i>Camargue.</i></h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Listen to me, good people of Provence,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Countrymen one and all, from Arles to Vence,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From Vanensolo even to Marseilles,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, if the heat oppress you, come, I pray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To Durancolo banks, and, lying low,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hear the maid’s tale, and weep the lover’s woe!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The little boat, in Andreloun’s control,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Parted the water silent as a sole,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The while the enamoured maiden whom I sing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Herself on the great Rhone adventuring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beside the urchin sat, and scanned the wave<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Intently, with a dreamy eye and grave,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Till the boy-boatman spake: “Now knewest thou ever,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Young lady, how immense is the Rhone river?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Betwixt Camargue and Crau might holden be<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Right noble jousts! That is Camargue!” said he;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“That isle so vast it can discern, I deem,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All the seven mouths of the Arlesian stream.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The rose-lights of the morn were beauteous<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the river, as he chatted thus.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the tartanes, with snowy sails outswelled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tranquilly glided up the stream, impelled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By the light breeze that blew from off the deep,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As by a shepherdess her milk-white sheep.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And all along the shore was noble shade<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By feathery ash and silver poplar made,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose hoary trunks the river did reflect,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And giant limbs with wild vines all bedeckt<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With ancient vines and tortuous, that upbore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their knotty, clustered fruit the waters o’er.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Majestically calm, but wearily<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And as he fain would sleep, the Rhone passed by<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like some great veteran dying. He recalls<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Music and feasting in Avignon’s halls<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And castles, and profoundly sad is he<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To lose his name and waters in the sea.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Meanwhile the enamoured maiden whom I sing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had leaped ashore; and the boy, tarrying<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Only to say, “The road that lies before<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is thine! The Saints will guide thee to the door<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of their great chapel,” took his oars in hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And swiftly turned his shallop from the land.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Under the pouring fire of the June sky,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like lightning doth Mirèio fly and fly.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">East, west, north, south, she seems to see extend<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One weary plain, savannas without end,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With glimpses of the sea, and here and there<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tamarisks lifting their light heads in air.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Golden-herb, samphire, shave-grass, soda,—these<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alone grow on the bitter prairies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where the black bulls in savage liberty<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rejoice, where the white horses all are free<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To roam abroad and breast the briny gale,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or air surcharged with sea-fog to inhale.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But now o’er all the marsh, dazzling to view,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Soars an immeasurable vault of blue,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Intense, profound. The only living thing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A solitary gull upon the wing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or hermit-bird whereof the shadow falls<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the desert meres at intervals,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Or red-legged chevalier, or hern, wild-eyed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With crest of three white plumes upraised in pride.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But soon the sun so beats upon the plain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That the poor, weary wanderer is fain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To loose and lift her folded neckerchief,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So from the burning heat to find relief.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Yet grows the torment ever more and more;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sun ascending higher than before,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till, as a starvèd lion’s eye devours<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Abyssinian desert that he scours,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yon lidless orb the very zenith gains<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And pours a flood of fire o’er all the plains.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Now were it sweet beneath a beech to slumber!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now, like a swarm of hornets without number,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">An angry swarm, fierce darting high and low,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or liks the hot sparks from a grindstone, grow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pitiless rays; and Love’s poor pilgrim, worn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And gasping, and by weariness o’erborne,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Forth from her bodice draws its golden pin,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that her panting bosom shows within.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All dazzling white, like the campanulas<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That bloom beside the summer sea, it was,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, like twin-billows in a brooklet, full.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Anon, the solitary scene and dull<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Loses a little of its sadness, and<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A lake shows on the limit of the land,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A spacious lake, whose wavelets dance and shine,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While shrubs of golden-herb and jessamine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the dark shore appear to soar aloft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until they cast a shadow cool and soft.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">It seems to the poor maid a heavenly vision,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A heartening glimpse into the land elysian.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And soon, afar, by that blue wave she sees<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A town with circling walls and palaces,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And fountains gay, and churches without end,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And slender spires that to the sun ascend,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And ships and lesser sailing-craft, sun-bright,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Entering the port; and the wind seemeth light.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that the oriflambs and streamers all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Languidly round the masts arise and fall.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“A miracle!” the maiden thought, and now<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wipes the abundant moisture from her brow,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, with new hope, toward the town doth fare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Deeming the Maries’ tomb is surely there.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alas! alas! he her flight ne’er so speedy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A change will pass upon the scene. Already<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sweet illusion seems to fade and flit;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Recedes the vision as she follows it.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">An airy show, the substance of a dream,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By spirit woven out of a sunbeam,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all its fair hues borrowed from the sky,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The filmy fabric wavers presently,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And melts away, and like a mist is gone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bewildered by the heat, and quite alone,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Is left Mirèio: yet her way she keeps,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toiling over the burning, yielding heaps<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of sand; over the salt-encrusted waste—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seamed, swollen, dazzling to the eye—doth haste.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On through the tall marsh-grasses and the reeds<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And rushes, haunted by the gnat, she speeds,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">With Vincen ever in her thought. And soon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Skirting the lonesome Vacarès lagune,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She sees it loom at last in distance dim,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She sees it grow on the horizon’s rim,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Saints’ white tower, across the billowy plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like vessel homeward bound upon the main.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, even at that blessèd moment, one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the hot shafts of the unpitying sun<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The ill-starred maiden’s forehead pierced, and she<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Staggered, death-smitten, by the glassy sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dropped upon the sand. Weep, sons of Crau,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sweetest flower in all the land lies low.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">When, in a valley by the river-side,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Young turtle-doves a huntsman bath espied,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Some innocently drinking, others cooing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He, through the copse-wood with his gun pursuing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At the most fair takes alway his first aim,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The cruel sun had only done the same.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Now, as she lay in swoon upon the shore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A swarm of busy gnats came hovering o’er,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who seeing the white breast and fluttering breath,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the poor maiden fainting to her death,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With ne’er a friendly spray of juniper<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From all the pulsing fire to shelter her,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Each one the viol of his tiny wings<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Imploring played with plaintive murmurings,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Get thee up quickly, quickly, damsel fair!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For aye malignant is this burning air,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And stung the drooping head; and sea-spray flew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sprinkling the fevered face with bitter dew:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Until at last Mirèio rose again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, with a feeble moan of mortal pain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“My head! my head!” she dragged her way forlorn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And slow from salicorne to salicorne,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Poor little one!—until her heavy feet<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Arrived before the seaside Saints’ retreat.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">There, her sad eyes with tears all brimming o’er,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the cold flags of the chapel-floor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wet with the infiltration of the sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She sank, and clasped her brow in agony;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And on the pinions of the waiting air<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was borne aloft Mirèio’s faltering prayer:—<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O holy Maries, who can cheer<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">The sorrow-laden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lend, I beseech, a pitying ear<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">To one poor maiden!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And when you see my cruel care<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">And misery,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then look in mercy down the air,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">And side with me!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I am so young, dear Saints above,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">And there’s a youth—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My handsome Vincen—whom I love<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">With utter truth!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I love him as the wayward stream<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Its wanderings;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As loves the new-fledged bird, I deem,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">To try its wings.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And now they tell me I must quench<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">This fire eternal;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Must from the blossoming almond wrench<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Its flowers vernal.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O holy Maries, who can cheer<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">The sorrow-laden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lend, I beseech, a pitying ear<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">To one poor maiden!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now am I come, dear Saints, from far,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">To sue for peace:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor mother-prayer my way could bar,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Nor wilderness;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The sun, that cruel archer, shot<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Into my brain,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thorns, as it were, and nails red-hot,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Sharp is the pain;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yet give me but my Vincen dear:<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Then will we duly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We two, with glad hearts worship here,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Oh, I say truly!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then the dire pain will rend no more<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">These brows of mine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the face bathed in tears before<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Will smile and shine.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“My sire mislikes our love; is cold<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">And cruel often:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twere naught to you, fair Saints of gold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">His heart to soften.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Howe’er so hard the olive grow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">’Tis mollified<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By all the winds that alway blow<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">At Advent-tide.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The medlar and the service-plum,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">So sharp to taste<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When gathered, strewn on straw become<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">A pleasant feast.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O holy Maries, who can cheer<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">The sorrow-laden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lend, I beseech, a pitying ear<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">To one poor maiden!<br/></span>
						<span style="margin-left: 4em;">. . . . . . . . . .</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i0">“Oh, what can mean this dazzling light?<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">The church is riven<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O’erhead; the vault with stars is bright.<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Can this be heaven?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh, who so happy now as I?<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">The Saints, my God,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The shining Saints,—toward me fly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Down yon bright road!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O blessed patrons, are you there<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">To help, to stay me?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet hide the dazzling crowns you wear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Or these will slay me.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Veil in a cloud the light appalling!<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">My eyes are heavy.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where is the chapel? Are you calling?<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">O Saints, receive me!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So, in a trance and past all earthly feeling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The stricken girl upon the pavement kneeling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With pleading hands, and head thrown backward, cried.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her large and lovely eyes were opened wide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As she beyond the veil of flesh discerned<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">St. Peter’s gates, and for the glory yearned.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Mute were her lips now; but her face yet shone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wrapped in glorious contemplation<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She seemed. So, when the gold-red rays of dawn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Early alight the poplar-tips upon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The flickering night-lamp turneth pale and wan<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the dim chamber of a dying man.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, as at daybreak, also, flocks arouse<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From slumber and disperse, the sacred house<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Appeared to open, all its vaulted roof<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To part, and pillars tall to stand aloof,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before the three fair women,—heavenly fair,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who on a starry path came down the air.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">White in the ether pure, and luminous,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Came the three Maries out of heaven thus.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One of them clasped an alabaster vase<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Close to her breast, and her celestial face<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In splendour had that star alone for peer<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That beams on shepherds when the nights are clear.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The next came with a palm in her hand holden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the wind lifting her long hair and golden.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The third was young, and wound a mantle white<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">About her sweet brown visage; and the light<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of her dark eyes, under their falling lashes,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was greater than a diamond’s when it flashes.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So, nearer to the mourner drew these three,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And leaned above, and spake consolingly.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bright and tender were the smiles that wreathed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their lips, and soft the message that they breathed.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They made the thorns of cruel martyrdom,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That pierced Mirèio, into flowers bloom.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i10">
							<big>
								<big>✠</big>
							</big>
							<br/>
						</span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Be of good cheer, thou poor Mirèio;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For we are they men call the Saints of Baux,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Maries of Judæa: and we three—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Be of good cheer!—we watch the stormy sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereby we succour many a craft distresst;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the wild waves are still at our behest.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Look up along St. James’s path in air!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A moment since we stood together there,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At the celestial end thereof, remote,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, gazing through the clustered stars, took note<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How faithful souls to Campoustello throng<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To seek the dear Saint’s tomb, and worship long.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And, with the tune of falling fountains blending,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We heard the solemn litanies ascending<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From pilgrims gathered in the fields at even,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And pealing of church-bells, and glory given<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto our son and nephew, by his names<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of Spain’s apostle and the greater James.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then were we glad of all the pious vows<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Paid to his memory; and, on the brows<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of those poor pilgrims, dews of peace shed we,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And their souls flooded with serenity;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, suddenly, thy warm petition came,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And seemed to smite us like a jet of flame.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Dear child, thy faith is great; yet thy request<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our pitying hearts right sorely hath opprest.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For thou wouldst drink the waters of pure love,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or ever to its source thee Death remove,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bliss we have in God himself to share.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Host thou, then, seen contentment anywhere<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“On earth? Is the rich blest, who softly lies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in his haughty heart his God denies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And cares not for his fellow-man at all?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou knowest the leech when it is gorged will fall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And he before the judgment-seat must pass<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of One who meekly rode upon an ass.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Is the young mother happy to impart<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto her baby, with a swelling heart,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The first warm jet of milk? One bitter drop,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mingled therewith, may poison all her hope.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now see her lean, distraught, the cradle over,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a fair little corse with kisses cover.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And hath she happiness, the promised bride,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wandering churchward by her lover’s side?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, no! The path under those lingering feet<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thornier shall prove, to those who travel it,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Than sloe-bush of the moorland. Here below<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are only trial sharp and weary woe.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And here below the purest waters ever<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are bitter on the lips of the receiver;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The worm is born within the fruit alway;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all things haste to ruin and decay.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The orange thou hast chosen, out of all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The basket’s wealth, shall one day taste as gall.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And in thy world, Mirèio, they who seem<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To breathe, sigh only. And should any dream<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of drinking at the founts that run not dry,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Anguish alone such bitter draught will buy.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So must the stone be broken evermore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ere thou extract the shining silver ore.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Happy is he who cares for others’ woe,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And toils for men, and wearies only so;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From his own shoulders tears their mantle warm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Therein to fold some pale and shivering form;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is lowly with the lowly, and can waken<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fire-light on cold hearths of the world-forsaken.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Hark to the sovereign word, of man forgot,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Death too is Life;’ and happy is the lot<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the meek soul and simple,—he who fares<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quietly heavenward, wafted by soft airs;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lily-white forsakes this low abode,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where men have stoned the very saints of God.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And if, Mirèio, thou couldst see before thee,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As we from empyrean heights of glory,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">This world; and what a sad and foolish thing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is all its passion for the perishing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Its churchyard terrors,—then, O lambkin sweet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mayhap thou wouldst for death and pardon bleat!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But, ere the wheat-ear hath its feathery birth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ferments the grain within the darksome earth,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Such ever is the law; and even we,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before we wore our crowns of majesty,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Drank bitter draughts. Therefore, thy soul to stay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We’ll tell the pains and perils of our way.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Paused for a moment, then, the holy three.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The waves, being fain to listen, coaxingly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had flocked along the ocean sand; the pines<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the rustling water-weeds made signs;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And teal and gull beheld, with deep amaze,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Peace on the restless heart of Vacarès;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The sun and moon, afar the desert o’er,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bow their great crimson foreheads, and adore;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all Camargue—salt-sown, forsaken isle—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seems thrilled with sacred expectation; while<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The saints, to hearten for her mortal strife<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Love’s martyr, tell the story of their life.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
