<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">La Crau</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i3">The rage of the mighty lioness<br/></span>
						<span class="i3">Who shall restrain?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She came to her den, and she found it bare:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A Moorish huntsman had entered there.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The huntsman came, and the whelp is gone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Away through the canebrake they have flown,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Galloping far at a headlong pace.<br/></span>
						<span class="i10">To follow—vain!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She roars awhile in her deep despite,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then rises and courses, lank and light,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the hills of Barbary.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As a maid bereft of her love is she.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Mirèio lay upon her little bed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clasping in both her hands her burning head.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dim was the chamber; for the stars alone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Saw the maid weep, and heard her piteous moan,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Help, Mother Mary, in my sore distress!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, cruel fate! Oh, father pitiless,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Who tread me underfoot! Could you but see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My heart’s mad tumult, you would pity me!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You used to call me darling long ago,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now you bend me to the yoke as though<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I were a vicious colt that you were fain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To break. Why does the sea not flood this plain?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I would the wealthy lands that make me weep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Were hid for evermore in the great deep!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, had I in a serpent’s hole been born,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of some poor vagrant, I were less forlorn!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For then if any lad, my Vincen even,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had asked my hand, mayhap it had been given.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O Vincen, who so handsome are and true!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If only they would let me go to you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’d cling as clings the tender ivy-vine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the oak: I would not ever pine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For food, but life in your caresses find,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And drink at wayside pools with happy mind.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So on her pallet the sweet maid lay sobbing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fire in her heart and every vein a-throbbing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the happy time remembering—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, calm and happy!—of her love’s fair spring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until a word in Vincen’s very tone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Comes to her memory. “<span class="lftspc">’</span>Twas you, my own,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Twas you,” she cried, “came one day to the farm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And said, ‘If ever thou dost come to harm,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If any lizard, wolf, or poisonous snake,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ever should wound thee with its fang,—betake<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thyself forthwith to the most holy Saints,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who cure all ills and hearken all complaints.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And sure I am in trouble now,” she said:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Therefore we’ll go, and come back comforted.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then lightly from her white cot glided she,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And straightway opened, with a shining key,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The wardrobe where her own possessions lay:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was of walnut wood, and carven gay.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Here were her childhood’s little treasures all:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here sacredly she kept the coronal<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Worn at her first communion; and thereby<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A faded sprig of lavender and dry,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a wax taper almost burned, as well,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Once blessed, the distant thunder to dispel.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A smart red petticoat she first prepares,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which she herself had quilted into squares,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of needlework a very masterpiece;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And round her slender waist she fastens this;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And over it another, finer one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She draws; and next doth a black bodice don,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And fasten firmly with a pin of gold.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On her white shoulders, her long hair unrolled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Curling, and loose like a dark garment, lay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which, gathering up, she swiftly coils away<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under a cap of fine, transparent lace;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then decks the veilèd tresses with all grace,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Thrice with a ribbon blue encircling them,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fair young brow’s Arlesian diadem.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lastly, she adds an apron to the rest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And folds a muslin kerchief o’er her breast.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In her dire haste, alone, the child forgat<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The shallow-crowned, broad-brimmed Provençal hat,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">That might have screened her from the mortal heat.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, so arrayed, crept forth on soundless feet<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Adown the wooden staircase, in her hand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her shoes, undid the heavy door-bar, and<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her soul unto the watchful saints commended,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As away like a wind of night she wended.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">It was the hour when constellations keep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their friendly watch o’er followers of the deep.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The eye of St. John’s eagle flashed afar,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As it alighted on a burning star,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One of the three where the evangelist<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hath his alternate dwelling. Cloud nor mist<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Defaced the dark serene of star-lit sky;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But the great chariot of souls went by<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On wingèd wheels along the heavenly road,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bearing away from earth its blessed load.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Far up the shining steeps of Paradise,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The circling hills behold it as it flies.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Mirèio hasted no less anxiously<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Than Magalouno in the days gone by,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who searched the wood with sad, inquiring glance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For her lost lover, Pèire of Provence,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When cruel waves divorced him from her side,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And left her lone and wretched. Soon espied<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The maid, upon the boundary of the lea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Folds where her sire’s own shepherds could she see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Already milking. Some the sheep compelled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Against the pen-side by the muzzle held,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To suckle quietly their tawny lambs.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Always arose the bleat of certain dams;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">While other childless ones the shepherds guide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toward the milker. On a stone astride,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mute as the very night, sits he, and dim;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While, pressed from swollen udders, a long stream<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of warm fine milk into the pail goes leaping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The white froth high about its border creeping.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The sheep-dogs all in tranquil slumber lay.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fine, large dogs—as white as lilies they—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stretched round the enclosure, muzzles deep in thyme.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And peace was everywhere, and summer clime;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And o’er the balmy country, far and near,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brooded a heaven full of stars, and clear.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So in the stillness doth Mirèio dash<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Along the hurdles, like a lightning flash,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lifting a wailing cry that never varies,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Will none go with me to the holy Maries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of all the shepherds?” They and the sheep hear it,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And see the maiden flitting like a spirit,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And huddle up, and bow their heads, as though<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Smit by a sudden gale. The farm-dogs know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her voice, but never stir her flight to stay.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now is she already far away,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Threads the dwarf-oaks, and like a partridge rushes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the holly and the camphyre bushes,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Her feet scarce touching earth. And now she passes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Curlews in flocks asleep amid the grasses<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under the oaks, who, roused from slumber soft,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Arise in haste, and wing their flight aloft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the sad and barren plain; and all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Together “Cour’li! cour’li! cour’li!” call,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Until the Dawn, with her dew-glittering tresses,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From mountain-top to level slow progresses,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sweetly saluted by the tufted lark,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Soaring and singing o’er the caverns dark<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the great hills, whose pinnacles each one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Appear to sway before the rising sun.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then was revealed La Crau, the bare, the waste,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The rough with stones, the ancient, and the vast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose proud old giants, if the tale be true,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Once dreamed, poor fools, the Almighty to subdue<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With but a ladder and their shoulders brave;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But He them ’whelmed in a destroying wave.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Already had the rebels dispossest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Mount of Victory of his tall crest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lifted with lever from its place; and sure<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They would have helped it high upon Ventour,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As they had piled the rugged escarpment<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They from the Alpine range had earlier rent.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But God his hand extended o’er the plain:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The north-west wind, thunder, and hurricane<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He loosed; and these arose like eagles three<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From mountain clefts and caverns and the sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wrapped in thick fog, with fury terrible,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And on the marble pile together fell.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then were the rude Colossi overthrown;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a dense covering of pudding-stone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Spread o’er La Crau, the desolate, the vast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mute, the bare to every stormy blast;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who wears the hideous garment to this day.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Meanwhile Mirèio farther speeds away<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">From the home-lands, while the sun’s ardent glare<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Makes visible all round the shimmering air;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And shrill cicalas, grilling in the grass,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beat madly evermore their tiny brass.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor tree for shade was there, nor any beast:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The many flocks, that in the winter feast.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">On the short, savoury grasses of the moor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had climbed the Alps, where airs are cool and pure,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And pastures fadeless. Yet the maid doth fly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under the pouring fire of a June sky,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fly, fly, like lightning. Lizards large and gray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Peep from their holes, and to each other say,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“She must be mad who thus the shingle clears,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under a heat that sets the junipers<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A-dancing on the hills; on Crau, the sands.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The praying mantes lift beseeching hands,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Return, return, O pilgrim!” murmuring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For God hath opened many a crystal spring;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And shady trees hath planted, so the rose<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To save upon your cheeks. Why, then, expose<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your brow to the unpitying summer heat<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vainly as well the butterflies entreat.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For her the wings of love, the wind of faith,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bear on together, as the tempest’s breath<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">White gulls astray over the briny plains<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of Agui-Morto. Utter sadness reigns<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In scattered sheep-cots of their tenants left,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And overrun with salicorne. Bereft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the hot desert, seemed the maid to wake,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And see nor spring nor pool her thirst to slake,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And slightly shuddered. “Great St. Gent!” she cried,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“O hermit of the Bausset mountain-side!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O fair young labourer, who to thy plough<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Didst harness the fierce mountain-wolf ere now,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in the flinty rock, recluse divine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Didst open springs of water and of wine,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And so revive thy mother, perishing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of heat! like me, when they were slumbering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou didst forsake thy household, and didst fare<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alone with God through mountain-passes, where<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy mother found thee! For me, too, dear Saint,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Open a spring; for I am very faint,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And my feet by the hot stones blisterèd!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, in high heaven, heard what Mirèio said<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The good St. Gent: and soon she doth discover<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A well far off, with a bright stone laid over;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, like a marten through a shower of rain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Speeds through the flaming sun-rays, this to gain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The well was old, with ivy overrun—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A watering-place for flocks; and from the sun<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Scarce by it sheltered sat a little boy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With basket-full of small white snails for toy.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With his brown hands, he one by one withdrew them,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tiny harvest-snails; and then sang to them,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i8">“Snaily, snaily, little nun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Come out of the cell, come into the sun!<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Show me your horns without delay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Or I’ll tear your convent-walls away.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then the fair maid of Crau, when she had dipped<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her burning lips into the pail, and sipped,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quickly upraised a lovely, rosy face,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, “Little one! what dost thou here?” she says.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A pause. “Pick snailies from the stones and grass?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thou hast guessed right!” the urchin’s answer was.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Here in my basket have I—see, how many!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nuns, harvest-snails, and these, as good as any!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“And thou dost eat them”—“Nay, not I,” replied he;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“But mother carries them to Arles on Friday,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sells them; and brings back nice, tender bread.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou wilt have been to Arles?”—“Never!” she said.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“What, never been to Arles! But I’ve been there!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, poor young lady! Couldst thou see how fair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And large a city that same Arles is grown!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She covers all the seven mouths of the Rhone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the islands of the great salt-mere<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her cattle graze: wild horses doth she rear.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And in one summer, corn enough doth grow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To feed her seven full years, if need were so.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She’s fishermen who fish on every sea,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seamen who front the storms right valiantly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of distant waters.” Thus with pretty pride<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The boy his sunny country glorified,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">In golden speech;—her blue and heaving ocean;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her Mont Majour, that keeps the mills in motion,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These with soft olives ever feeding fully;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her bitterns in the marshes booming dully.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One thing alone, thou lovely, dusky town,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The child forgat,—of all thy charms the crown;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">He said not, fruitful Arles, that thy fine air<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gives to thy daughters beauty rich and rare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As grapes to autumn, or as wings to bird,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or fragrance to the hill-sides. Him had heard<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The country maiden, sadly, absently.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now, “Bright boy, wilt thou not go with me?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">She said; “for, ere the frogs croak in the willow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My foot must planted be beyond the billow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Come with me! I must o’er the Rhone be rowed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And left there in the keeping of my God!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Now, then,” the urchin cried, “thou poor, dear lady,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou art in luck! for we are fishers,” said he;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And thou shalt sleep under our tent this night,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pitched in the shadow of the poplars white,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So keeping all thy pretty clothing on;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And father, with the earliest ray of dawn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In our own little boat will put thee o’er!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But she, “Do not detain me, I implore:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I am yet strong enough this night to wander.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Now God forbid!” was the lad’s prompt rejoinder:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Wouldst thou see, then, the crowd of sorry shapes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From the Trau-de-la-Capo that escapes?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For if they meet thee, be thou sure of this,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They’ll drag thee with them into the abyss!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Trau-de-la-Capo! What may that be, pray?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I’ll tell thee, lady, as we pick our way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the stones.” And forthwith he began:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Once was a treading-floor that overran<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With wealth of sheaves. To-morrow, on thy ways,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou’lt pass, upon the riverside, the place.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Trod by a circle of Camargan steeds,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tall sheaves have been yielding up their seeds<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the incessant hoofs, a month or more.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No pause, no rest; and, on the treading-floor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dusty and winding, still the eye perceives<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A very mountain of untrodden sheaves.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Also, the weather was so fiercely hot,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The floor would burn like fire; and rested not<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The wooden forks that more sheaves yet supplied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While at the horses’ muzzles there were shied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clusters of bearded ears unceasingly,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They flew as arrows from the cross-bow fly.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And on St. Peter’s day and on St. Charles’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rang, and rang vainly, all the bells of Arles:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There was no Sunday and no holiday<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the unhappy horses: but alway<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The heavy tramp around the weary road,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alway the pricking of the keeper’s goad,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Alway the orders issued huskily,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As in the fiery whirlwind still stood he.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The greedy master of the treaders white<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had even muzzled them, in his despite.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, when Our Lady’s day in August came,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The coupled beasts were treading, all the same,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The pilèd sheaves, foam-drenched. Their livers clung<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fast to their ribs, and their jaws drivelling hung,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When suddenly an icy, northern gale<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Smit, swept the floor,—and God’s blasphemers pale.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It quakes! It parts! On a black caldron’s brink<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now stand they, and their eyes with horror sink.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then the sheaves whirl with fury terrible.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pitch-forkers, keepers, keepers-aids as well,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Struggle to save them; but they naught can do:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The van, the van-goats, and the mill-stones too,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Horses and drivers, treading-floor, and master<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are swallowed up in one immense disaster!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“You make me shudder!” poor Mirèio said.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ah, but that is not all, my pretty maid!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou thinkest me a little mad, may be:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But on the morrow thou the spot wilt see;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And carp and tench in the blue water playing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, in the reeds, marsh-blackbirds roundelaying.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But on Our Lady’s day, when mounts again<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fire-crowned sun to the meridian,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lay thee down softly, ear to earth,” said he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“And eye a-watch, and presently thou’lt see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The gulf, at first so limpid, will begin<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To darken with the shadow of the sin;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And slowly up from the unquiet deep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A murmuring sound, like buzzing flies, will creep;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And then a tinkling, as of tiny bells,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That soon into an awful uproar swells<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Among the water-weeds! Like human voices<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Inside an amphora the fearsome noise is!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And then it is the trot of wasted horses<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Painfully tramping round their weary courses<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon a hard, dry surface, evermore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Echoing like a summer threshing-floor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whom drives a brutal keeper, nothing loth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hurries them with insult and with oath.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But, when the holy sun is sinking low,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blasphemies turn hoarse and fainter grow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tinkling dies among the weeds. Far off,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The limping, sorry steed is heard to cough;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, on the top of the tall reeds a-swinging,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Once more the blackbirds begin sweetly singing.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So, full of chat, and with his basket laden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Travelled the little man before the maiden;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While the descending sun with rose invests<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The great blue ramparts and the golden crests<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the hill-range, peaceful and pure and high,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Blending its outline with the evening sky.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Seemed the great orb, as he withdrew in splendour,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">God’s peace unto the marshes to surrender,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And to the great lake, and the olives gray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the Vaulungo, and the Rhone away<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There in the distance, and the reapers weary,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who now unbend, and quaff the sea-air, cheery.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Till the boy cries that far away he sees<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The home-tent’s canvas fluttering in the breeze.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“And the white poplar, dear maid, seest thou?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And brother Not, who climbs it even now?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He’s there after cicalas, be thou sure;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or to spy me returning o’er the moor.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ah, now he sees us! And my sister Zeto,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who helped him with her shoulder, turns this way too;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And seems to tell my mother that she may<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Put on the <i>bouillabaise</i> without delay.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And mother also, I can see her leaning<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the boat, and the fresh fish a-gleaning.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then, as the two made haste with one accord<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To mount the dike, the lusty fisher roared,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Now this is charming! Look this way, my wife!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our little Andreloun, upon my life,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will be the prince of fishers one day,” said he;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For he has caught the queen of eels already!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
