<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CANTO_XI" name="CANTO_XI"/>CANTO XI.<br/>
			<br/>
			<i>The Saints.</i></h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The cross was looming yet, Mirèio,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Aloft on the Judæan mount of woe,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wet with the blood of God; and all the time<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seemed crying to the city of the crime,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘What hast thou done, thou lost and slumbering—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What hast thou done, I say, with Bethlehem’s King?’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The angry clamours of the streets were stayed:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Cedron alone a low lamenting made<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Afar; and Jordan rolled a gloomy tide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hasting into the desert, there to hide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The overflowings of his grief and rage<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Mid terebinth and lentisk foliage.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And all the poorer folk were heavy-hearted,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Knowing it was the Christ who had departed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">First having opened his own prison-door,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On friends and followers to look once more,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sacred keys unto St. Peter given,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, like an eagle, soared away to heaven.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh! then in Jewry woe and weeping were<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the fair Galilean carpenter,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Him who His honeyed parables distilled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over their hearts, and fainting thousands filled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the hillsides with unleavened bread,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And healed the leper and revived the dead.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But scribes and kings and priests, and all the horde<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of sacrilegious vendors whom the Lord<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had driven from his house, their hatred uttered,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘And who the people will restrain,’ they muttered,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Unless in all the region round about<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The glory of this cross be soon put out?’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So raged they, and the martyrs testified:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stephen the first was stoned until he died,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">James with the sword was slain, and many a one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Cruelly crushed beneath a weight of stone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet, dying, all bear record undismayed:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Christ Jesus is the Son of God!’ they said.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then us, brothers and sisters of the slain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who him had followed in a loving train,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They thrust into a crazy bark; and we,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oarless and sailless, drifted out to sea.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We women sorely wept, the men their eyes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Anxiously lifted to the lowering skies.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Palaces, temples, olive-trees, we saw—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swiftly, oh swiftly!—from our gaze withdraw,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All saving Carmel’s rugged crests, and those<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But as a wave on the horizon rose.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When suddenly a sharp cry toward us drifted.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We turned, and saw a maid with arms uplifted.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Oh, take me with you!’ cried she in distress;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Oh, take me in the bark, my mistresses,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With you! I, too, must die for Jesus’ sake!’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was our handmaid Sarah thus who spake.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Up there in heaven, whither she is gone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She shineth sweetly as an April dawn!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Seaward before the wind our vessel drave.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then God a thought unto Salome gave:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her veil upon the foamy deep she threw,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, wondrous faith!—and on the water, blue<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And white commingling wildly, it sustained<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The maid until our fragile craft she gained,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“To her as well the strong breeze lending aid.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now saw we in the hazy distance fade,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hill-top by hill-top, our dear native land;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sea encompassed us on every hand;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a sharp home-sickness upon us fell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pangs whereof he who hath felt may tell.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So must we say farewell, O sacred shore!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O doomed Judæa, farewell evermore!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy just are banished, thy God crucified!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Henceforth let serpents in thy halls abide;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wandering lions, tawny, terrible,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Feed on thy vines and dates. Farewell! farewell!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The gale had grown into a tempest now:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The vessel fled before it. On the prow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Martial was kneeling, and Saturnius:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While, in his mantle folded, Trophimus<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The aged saint silently meditated;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Maximin the bishop near him waited.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“High on the main-deck Lazarus held his place.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There was an awful pallor on his face,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hues of the winding-sheet and of the grave.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He seemed to face the anger of the wave.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Martha his sister to his side had crept,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Magdalene behind them cowered and wept.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The slender bark, pursued of demons thus,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Contained, beside, Cléon, Eutropius,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Marcellus, Joseph of Arimathea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sidonius. And sweet it was to hear<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The psalms they sang on the blue waste of sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Leaned o’er the tholes. Te Deum, too, said we.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“How rushed the boat the sparkling billows by!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">E’en yet that sea seems present to the eye.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The breeze, careering, on the waters hurled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereby the snowy spray was tossed and whirled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lifted in light wreaths into the air,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That soared like souls aloft, and vanished there.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Out of the waves at morning rose the Sun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And set therein when his day’s course was run.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mere waifs were we upon the briny plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sport of all the winds that scour the main;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet of our God withheld from all mischance,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That we might bear His gospel to Provence.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“At last there came a morning still and bright.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We noted how, with lamp in hand, the night<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Most like an anxious widow from us fled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Risen betimes to turn her household bread<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Within the oven. Ocean seemed as napping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The languid waves the boatside barely tapping.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Till a dull, bellowing noise assailed the ear.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unknown before, it chilled our blood to hear.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And next we marked a strange, upheaving motion<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the utmost limit of the ocean,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, stricken speechless by the gathering roar,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Helplessly gazed the troubled waters o’er.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then saw we all the deep with horror lower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As the swift squall descended in its power;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The waves drop dead still,—’twas a portent fell;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bark hang motionless, as by a spell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Entranced; and far away, against the skies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A mountain of black water seemed to rise,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And all the heaped-up sea, with vapour crested,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To burst upon our vessel, thus arrested.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">God, ’twas an awful hour! One monster wave<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seemed thrusting us into a watery grave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fainting to death. Or ever it closed o’er us,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The next upon a dizzy height upbore us.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The lightning cleft the gloom with blades of fire;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Peal followed peal of thunder, deafening, dire.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was as if all hell had been unchained<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon our tiny craft, which groaned and strained<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So hunted, and seemed rushing on her wreck,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And smote our foreheads with her heaving deck.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now rode we on the shoulders of the main;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now sank into its inky gulfs again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where the seal dwelleth and the mighty shark,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the sea-peacock; and we seemed to hark<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the sad cry, lifted unceasingly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By the unresting victims of the sea.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“A great wave brake above us, and hope died.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then Lazarus prayed: ‘O Lord, be thou our guide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who me ere now out of the tomb didst bring!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Succour the bark, for she is foundering!’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like a wood-pigeon’s wing, this outcry clove<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tempest, and went up to realms above.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And Jesus, looking from the palace fair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where he sat throned, beheld his friend’s despair,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the fierce deep yawning to swallow him.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Straightway the Master’s gentle eyes grew dim,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His heart yearned over us with pity warm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And one long sun-ray leaped athwart the storm.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now God be praised! For, though we yet were tost<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Right roughly up and down, and sank almost<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With bitter sea-sickness, our fears were stayed:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The haughty waves began to be allayed;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clouds brake afar, then vanished altogether,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a green shore gleamed through the bright’ning weather.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Long was it yet ere the shocks quite subsided<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the tempestuous waves; and our boat glided<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our crazy boat, nearer that welcome shore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All tranquilly, a dying breeze before.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Smooth as a grebe our keel the breakers clomb,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Furrowing into great flakes the snowy foam.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Until—once more all glory be to God!—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon a rockless beach we safely trod,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And knelt on the wet sand, and cried, ‘O Thou<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who saved from sword and tempest, hear our vow!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Each one of us is an evangelist<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy law to preach. We swear it, O Lord Christ!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“At that great name, that cry till then unheard,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Noble Provence, wert thou not deeply stirred?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy woods and fields, in all their fair extent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thrilled with the rapture of a sweet content;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As a dog scents his master’s coming feet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And flies with bounding welcome him to meet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Thou, Heavenly Father, also didst provide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A feast of shell-fish, stranded by the tide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To stay our hunger; and, to quench our thirst,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Madest among the salicornes outburst<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The same clear, healing spring, which flows alway<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Inside the church where sleeps our dust to-day.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Glowing with zeal, we track the shingly Rhone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From moor to moor. In faith we travel on<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until right gladly we discern the traces<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of human husbandry in those wild places,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And soon, afar, the tall Arlesian towers,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Crowned by the standard of the emperors.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“To-day, fair Arles, a harvester thou seemest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who sleepest on thy threshing-floor, and dreamest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of glories past; but a queen wert thou then,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And mother of so brave sea-faring men,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The noisy winds themselves aye lost their way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the great harbour where thy shipping lay.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Rome had arrayed thee in white marble newly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As an imperial princess decked thee duly.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy brow a crown of stately columns wore;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The gates of thy arena were sixscore;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou hadst thy theatre and hippodrome,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So to make mirth in thy resplendent home!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“We pass within the gates. A crowd advances<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toward the theatre, with songs and dances.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We join them; and the eager thousands press<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Through the cool colonnades of palaces;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As thou, mayhap, a mighty flood hast seen<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rush through a maple-shaded, deep ravine.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Arrived,—oh, shame and sorrow!—we saw there<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the proscenium, with bosoms bare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Young maidens waltzing to a languid lyre,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And high refrain sung by a shrill-voiced choir.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They in the mazes of their dance surrounded<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A marble shape, whose name like ‘Venus’ sounded.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The frenzied populace its clamour adds<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the cries of lasses and of lads,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who shout their idol’s praises o’er and o’er,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Hail to the Venus, of joy the bestower!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hail to thee, Venus, goddess of all grace!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mother of earth and of the Arlesian race!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The statue, myrtle-crowned, with nostrils wide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And head high-borne, appears to swell with pride<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Amid the incense-clouds; when suddenly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In horror of so great audacity,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Leaps Trophimus amid the maddened wretches,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And o’er the bewildered throng his arms outstretches.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>People of Arles!’ in mighty tones he cried,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Hear me, even for the sake of Christ who died<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No more.’ But, smitten by his shaggy frown,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The idol groaned and staggered, and fell down,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Headlong, from off its marble pedestal.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fell, too, the awe-struck dancers, one and all.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Therewith went up, as ’twere, a single howl<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Choked were the gateways with a rabble foul,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who filled all Arles with terror and dismay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that patricians tore their crowns away;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the enragèd youth closed round us there,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While flashed a thousand poniards in the air.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yet they recoiled;—whether it were the sight<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of us, in our salt-crusted robes bedight;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or Trophimus’ calm brow which beamed on them,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As wreathed with a celestial diadem;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or tear-veiled Magdalene, who stood between us,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How tenfold fairer than their sculptured Venus!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And the old saint resumed: ‘Arlesian men,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hear ye my message first; and slay me then,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If need be. Ye have seen your goddess famed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shiver like glass when my God was but named:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Deem not, Arlesians, that the thing was wrought<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By my poor, feeble voice; for we are naught.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>The God who thus your idol smote, but now<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No lofty temple hath on the hill’s brow;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But Day and Night see him alone up there!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And stern to sin, but generous to prayer,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is he; and he hath made, with his own hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sky, the sea, the mountains, and the land.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>One day he saw, from his high dwelling-place,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All his good things devoured by vermin base;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Slaves who drank hatred with their tears, and had<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No comforter; and Evil, priestly clad,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At altars keeping school; and, in the street,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Maids who ran out the libertines to meet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Wherefore, to purge this vileness, and to end<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Man’s torment and our pilloried race befriend,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He sent his own Son out of heaven down.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Naked and poor, wearing no golden crown,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He came, was of a virgin born, and saw<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The daylight first pillowed on stable-straw.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>People of Arles, turn to this lowly One.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ourselves can show the wonders he hath done,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who were his comrades; and, in that far land<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where rolls the yellow Jordan, saw him stand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In his white linen robe, amid the crowd,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who him assailed with maledictions loud.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Full gentle was his message: for he showed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That men should love each other, and that God<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is both almighty and all merciful;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And that the kingdom where he beareth rule<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Descendeth not to tyrants, cheats, and scorners,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But to the poor, the lowly, and the mourners.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>These were his teachings: and he them attested<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By walking on the waters; and arrested<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sickness most bitter by a glance, a word.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dead, by yon grim rampart undeterred,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Came back to earth. This Lazarus whom you see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Once rotted in the grave. But jealousy<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Inflamed the bad hearts of the Jewish kings.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They led him to a mountain for these things,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And cruelly unto a tree trunk nailed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Spat on the sacred face, and coarsely railed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lifted him on high.’ Here all the throng<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brake into loud lament and sobbing strong.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Mercy,’ they cried, ‘for our iniquities!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What shall we do the Father to appease?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Answer us, man of God! If blood must flow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He shall have hecatombs.’—‘Ah, no! ah, no!’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Replied the saint; ‘but slay before the Father<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your vices and your evil passions rather!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So knelt, and prayed: ‘Lord, thou dost not desire<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Odour of slaying, sacrificial fire,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or stately temples! Dearer far to thee<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is the bread given to those who fainting be;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or sweet girl’s timid coming, who doth bring<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her pure heart, like a May-flower, to her king.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“As o’er the Apostle’s lips, like sacred oil,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The word of God was flowing, ’gan recoil<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The idols everywhere, and plunged at last<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Adown the temple stairs; while tears dropped fast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And rich and poor and working-men all ran<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To kiss the garment of the holy man.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then bare Sidonius witness. In his night—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He was born blind—he led to the true light<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The men of Arles. And Maximin, beside,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The resurrection of the Crucified<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Set forth, and bade them turn from sin away.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Arles was baptized upon that very day.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then the Lord’s breath did speed us in our going,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like wind upon a fire of shavings blowing;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For, as we turned of these to take farewell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Came messengers, before our feet who fell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And passionately cried, ‘O god-sent strangers!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hear yet the story of our cruel dangers.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>To our unhappy city came the sound<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of marvels wrought and oracles new found.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She sends us hither. We are dead who stand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before you! Such a monster wastes our land!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A scourge of God, greedy of human gore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It haunts our woods and gorges. We implore<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Your help. The monster hath a dragon’s tail,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bristles its back with many a horrid scale.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It hath six human feet, and fleet they are;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A lion’s jaw; eyes red like cinnabar.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Its prey it hideth in a cavern lone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under a rock that beetles o’er the Rhone.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Now day by day our fishermen grow few<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And fewer.’ Saying this, they wept anew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bitterly,—the men of Tarascon.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then maiden Martha said, serene and strong,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Ready am I, and my heart yearns with pity.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Marcellus, haste: we two will save the city!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“For the last time on earth we did embrace,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With hope of meeting in a happy place,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And parted. Martial to Limoges him hied,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While fair Toulouse became Saturnius’ bride:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And our Eutropius the new cause did plead,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sow, in brave Orange, the blessèd seed.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And thou, sweet virgin, whither goest thou?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With step unfaltering and untroubled brow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Martha her cross and holy-water carried<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Against the dragon dire, and never tarried.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The wild men clomb the pine-trees round about,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fray to witness and the maiden’s rout.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Startled from slumber in his darksome cave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou shouldst have seen the leap the monster gave<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet vainly writhed he ’neath the holy dew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And growled and hissed as Martha near him drew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bound with a frail moss-halter, and forth led<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Snorting. Then all the people worshippèd.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Huntress Diana art thou?’ prostrate falling<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before the Christian maid, began they calling;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Or yet Minerva, the all-wise and chaste?’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Nay, nay!’ the damsel answered in all haste:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘I am God’s handmaid only.’ And the crowd<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She taught until with her to Him they bowed.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then by the power of her young voice alone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She smote Avignon’s rock; and from the stone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Welled faith in so pellucid stream, that, later,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clements and Gregories in that fair water<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dipped holy chalices their thirst to slake,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Rome long years did for her glory quake.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And all Provence, regenerate, sang so clear<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A hymn of praise, that God was glad to hear.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hast thou not marked, when rain begins to fall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How spring the drooping trees and grasses all,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How soon the foliage with joy will quiver?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So fevered souls drank of this cooling river!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Thou fair Marseilles, who openest on the sea<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy haughty eyes and gazest languidly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As though naught else were worthy to behold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, though the winds rage, dreamest but of gold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When Lazarus preached to thee, thou didst begin<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Those eyes to close, and see the night within,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And to the sources of that river speeding,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That aye the tears of Magdalene were feeding,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Didst wash thy sins away: and in this hour<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Art proud once more; but other storms may lower.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forget not, then, amid thy revelries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose tears they are that bathe thine olive-trees!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Dark cedars that on Mount Sambuco grew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sheer ledges of the hills of Aix, and you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tall pines, clothing the flanks of Esterel,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And junipers of Trevaresso, tell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How thrilled your vales with joy, when, his cross bearing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bishop Maximin was through them faring.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Seest thou one with white arms on her breast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who kneels and prays in yonder grotto, dressed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the bright garment of her floating hair?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Poor sufferer! Her tender knees are bare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And cruelly by the sharp flints are torn.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The moon, with pale torch, watches the forlorn<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And sad recluse. The woods in silence bow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The angels hush their very heart-throbs now,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As, gazing through a crevice, they espy<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A pearly tear fall from the lifted eye,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And haste the precious gem to gather up,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And keep for ever in a golden cup.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Enough, O Magdalene! Thirty years ago,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The wind that in the forest whispers low<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bare thee the pardon of the Man divine!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tears that the rock weeps are tears of thine.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These, like a snowfall softly sprinkled o’er,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall whiten woman’s love for ever more!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But naught can stay the mourner’s gnawing grief.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Even the little birds bring not relief,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That flock around her, building many a nest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On Saint Pilon; nor spirits of the blest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who lift and rock her in their arms of love,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And soar, seven times a day, the vales above.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O Lord, be thine the glory! And may we<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In thy full brightness and reality<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Behold thee ever! Poor and fugitive,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We women did of thy great grace receive.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We, even we, touched by thy love supernal,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shed some faint reflex of the light eternal.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ye, Alpine peaks and all blue hills of Baux,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the latest hour of time will show<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The traces of our teaching carved in stone!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And so Death found us on the marshes lone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Deep in Camargue, encircled by the sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And from our day’s long labour set us free.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And as, on earth, haste all things to decay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Faded the memory of our tombs away.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While sang Provence her songs, and time rolled on,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till, as Durance is blended with the Rhone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ended the merry kingdom of Provence,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And fell asleep upon the breast of France.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>France, take thy sister by the hand!’ So saith<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our land’s last king, he drawing near to death.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘On the great work the future hath in store,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Together counsel take! Thou art the more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Strong; she, the more fair: and rebel night<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before your wedded glory shall take flight.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“This did Renè. Therefore we sought the king,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As on his feathers he lay slumbering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And showed the spot where long our bones had lain;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And he, with bishops twelve and courtly train,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Came down into this waste of sand and waves,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And found, among the salicornes, our graves.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Adieu, dear Mirèio! The hour flies;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, like a taper’s flame before it dies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We see life’s light within thy body flicker.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet, ere the soul is loosed,—come quick, oh quicker,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My sisters!—we the hills of heaven must scale<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or ever she arrive within the veil.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Roses and a white robe we must prepare!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She is love’s martyr and a virgin fair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who dies to-day! With sweetest flowers blow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Celestial paths! and on Mirèio<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shine saintly splendours of the heavenly host!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
