<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Muster</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">All sorrowfully droop the lotus-trees;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And heart-sick to their hives withdraw the bees,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forgetful of the heath with savoury sweet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And with milk-thistle. Water-lilies greet<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Kingfishers blue that to the vivary hie,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And “Have you seen Mirèio?” is their cry.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">While Ramoun and his wife by the fireside<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are sitting, lost in grief, and swollen-eyed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And at their hearts the bitterness of death.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Doubtless,” they said, “her reason wandereth.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, what a mad and wretched maid it is!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, what a heavy, cruel downfall this!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh, dire disgrace! Our beauty and our hope<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So with the last of trampers to elope!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fled with a gypsy! And who shall discover<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The secret hole of this kidnapping lover,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where he the shameless one concealèd hath?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, as they spake, they knit their brows in wrath.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Now came the cupbearer with ass and pannier,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And from the threshold, in his wonted manner,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Good-morrow,” Jane. “I’m come,” he said, “to seek<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The labourer’s lunch.” And Ramoun could but wreak<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His anguish on him. “Go, you cursèd churl!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’m as a cork-tree barked, without my girl!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yet hark ye, cupbearer, upon your track<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Across the fields like lightning go you back,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bid the ploughmen and the mowers all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quit ploughs and scythes, the harvesters let fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their sickles, and their shepherds too,” said he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Forsake their flocks, and instant come to me!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then, fleeter than a goat, the faithful man<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O’er stony fallow and red clover ran,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Threaded holm-oaks on long declivities,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Leaped o’er the roads along the base of these,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now already scents the sweet perfume<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of new-mown hay, and the blue-tufted bloom<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Of tall lucerne descries; and presently<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The measured sweep of the long scythes hears he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lusty mowers bending in a row<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beholds, and grass by the keen steel laid low<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In verdant swaths,—ever a pleasant sight,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And children, and young maidens, with delight<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Raking the hay and in cocks piling it;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While crickets, that before the mowers flit,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hark to their singing. Also, farther on,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">An ash-wood cart, by two white oxen drawn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where a deft cartman, piles the well-cured grass<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By armfuls high and higher, till the mass<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Rises about his loins, and so conceals<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The rails, the cart-beam, and the very wheels;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, when the cart moves on, with the hay trailing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It seems like some unwieldy vessel sailing.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now the cartman rises, and descries<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The runner, and “Hold, men! there’s trouble!” cries;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And all his aids, who in great forkfuls carry<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To him the hay, do for a moment tarry,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wipe their streaming brows; and mowers rest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The scythe-back carefully upon the breast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And whet the edge, as they the plain explore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That Phœbus wings his burning arrows o’er.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Began the rustic messenger straightway,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Hear men, what our good master bade me say:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“‘Cupbearer,’ was his word, ‘upon your track<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Across the fields like lightning go you back,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bid the ploughmen and the mowers all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quit ploughs and scythes, the harvesters let fall<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“‘Their sickles, and the shepherds hastily<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forsake their flocks, and hither come to me!’”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, fleeter than a goat, the faithful man<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O’er the rich, madder-growing hillocks ran,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Althen’s bequest,—and saw on every hand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The gold of perfect ripeness tinge the land,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And centaury-starred fields, and ploughmen bent<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Above their ploughs and on their mules intent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And earth, awakened from her winter-sleep,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And shapeless clods upturned from furrows deep,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wagtails frisking o’er; and yet again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Hearken to what our master saith, good men!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“‘Cupbearer,’ was his word, ‘upon your track<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Across the fields like lightning go you back,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bid the ploughmen and the mowers all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quit ploughs and scythes, the harvesters let fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their sickles, and the shepherds hastily<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forsake their flocks, and hither come to me!’”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then the stout runner, fleeter than the goats,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dashed through the pieces waving with wild-oats,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fosses o’erleaped with meadow-flowers bright,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in great yellow wheat-fields passed from sight,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where reapers forty, sickle each in hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like a devouring fire fall on the land,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And strip her mantle rich and odorous<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From off her breast, and, ever gaining thus<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As wolves upon their prey, rob, hour by hour,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Earth of her gold, and summer of her flower;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While in the wake of each, in ordered line,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Falls the loose grain, like tendrils of the vine.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And the sheaf-binders, ever on the watch,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dropping wheat in handfuls deftly catch,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And underneath the arm the same bestow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until, so gathering, they have enow;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, pressing with the knee, they tightly bind,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lastly fling the perfect sheaf behind.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Twinkle the sickles keen like swarming bees,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or laughing ripple upon sunny seas<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where flounders are at play. Erect and tall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With rough beards blent, in heaps pyramidal,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sheaves by hundreds rise. The plain afar<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shows like a tented camp in days of war;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Even like that which once arose upon<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our own Beaucaire, in days how long withdrawn!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When came a host of terrible invaders,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The great Simon, and all the French crusaders,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Led by a legate, and in fierce advance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Count Raymond slaughtered and laid waste Provence.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And here, with gleanings falling from her fingers,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Full many a merry gleaner strays and lingers;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or in the warm lea of the stacks of corn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or ’mid the canes, drops languidly, o’erborne<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By some long look, that e’en bewilders her,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Because Love also is a harvester.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And yet again the master’s word,—“Go back<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like lightning, cupbearer, upon your track,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bid the ploughmen and the mowers all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quit ploughs and scythes, the harvesters let fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their sickles, and the shepherds instantly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forsake their flocks, and hither come to me!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then fleeter than a goat sped on his way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The faithful soul, straight through the olives gray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On, on, like a north-eastern gale descending<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the vineyards, and the branches rending,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until, away in Crau, the waste, the lonely,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Behold him, where the partridge whirreth only;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, still remote, discovers he the flocks<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tranquilly lying under the dwarf-oaks,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the chief-shepherd, with his helpers young,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For noon-tide rest about the heather flung,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And little wagtails hopping at their ease<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O’er sheep that ruminate unmoved by these.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And slowly, slowly sailing o’er the sea<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Diaphanous vapours, light and white, sees he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And deems that up in heaven some fair saint,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gliding too near the sun, is stricken faint<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the aerial heights, and hath let fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her convent-veil. And still the herald’s call:—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Hark, shepherds, to the master’s word,—‘Go back<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like lightning, cupbearer, upon your track,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bid the ploughmen and the mowers all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quit ploughs and scythes, the reapers too let fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their sickles, and the shepherds instantly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forsake their flocks, and hither come to me!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then the scythes rested and the ploughs were stayed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The forty highland reapers each his blade<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let fall, and rushed as bees on new-found wings<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forsake the hive, begin their wanderings,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, by the din of clanging cymbals led,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gather them to a pine. So also fled<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The labourers one and all; the waggoners,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And they who tended them; the rick-builders,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gleaners, and shepherds, and of sheaves the heapers,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Binders of sheaves, rakers, mowers, and reapers,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mustered them at the homestead. There, heart-sore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And silent, on the grass-grown treading-floor,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The master and his wife sat down to bide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The coming of the hands; who, as they hied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thither, much marvelled at the strange behest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So calling them from toil, and who addrest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These words unto old Ramoun, drawing near:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thou sentest for us, master. We are here.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then Ramoun raised his head, and thus replied;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The great storm alway comes at harvest-tide.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">However well-advised, as we advance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We must, poor souls, all stumble on mischance:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I cannot say it plainer. Friends, I pray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let each tell what he knows, without delay!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Lauren de Gout came forward first. Now he<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had failed no single year since infancy<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His quivered sickle from the hills to bring<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Down into Arles when ears were yellowing.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brown as a church-stone, he, with weather-stain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or ancient rock the sea-waves charge in vain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The sun might scorch, the north-west wind might roar,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But this old king of reapers evermore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was first at work. And now with him there came<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seven rough and stalwart boys who bore his name.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Him with one voice the harvesters did make<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their chief, and justly: therefore thus he spake:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If it be true that, when the dawning sky<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is ruddy, there is rain or snow close by,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then what I saw this very morn, my master,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Presageth surely sorrow and disaster.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So may God stay the earthquake! But as night<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fled westward, followed by the early light,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And wet with dew as ever, I the men<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">First summoned briskly to their toil again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And then myself, my sleeves uprolling gayly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bent me to mine own task, as I do daily;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But at the first stroke wounded thus my hand,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A thing which hath not happened, understand,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“For thirty years.” His fingers then he showed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the deep gash, wherefrom the blood yet flowed.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then groaned, more piteously than before,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mirèio’s parents; while a lusty mower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One Jan Bouquet, a knight of La Tarasque<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From Tarascon, a hearing rose to ask.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A rough lad he, yet kind and comely too.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">None with such grace in Condamino threw<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pike and flag, and never merrier fellow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sang Lagadigadèu’s ritournello<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">About the gloomy streets of Tarascon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, once a year, they ring with shout and song,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And brighten up with dances and are blithe.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He might have been a master of the scythe,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Could he have held the straight, laborious path;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, when the fête-days came, farewell the swath,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And welcome revels underneath the trees,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And orgies in the vaulted hostelries,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And bull-baitings, and never-ending dances!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A very roisterer he who now advances,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With, “As we, master, in long sweeps were mowing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I hailed a nest of francolines, just showing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under a tuft of tares; and, as I bent<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the pendent grass, with the intent<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“To count the fluttering things, what do I see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But horrible red ants—oh, misery!—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In full possession of the nest and young!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Three were then dead. The rest, with vermin stung,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their little heads out of the nest extended,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As though, poor things, they cried to be defended;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But a great cloud of ants, more venemous<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Than nettles, greedy, eager, furious,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Them were o’erwhelming even then; and I,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Leaning upon my scythe right pensively,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Could hear, far off, the mother agonize<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over their cruel fate, with piteous cries.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">This tale of woe, following upon the other,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is a lance-thrust to father and to mother:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The worst foreboding seemeth justified.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, as a tempest in the hot June-tide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gathering silently, ascends the air,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The weather darkening ever, till the glare<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Of lightning shows in the north-east, and loud<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Peal follows peal, another left the crowd,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One Lou Marran. It was a name renowned<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In all the farms when winter-eves came round,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And labourers, chatting while the mules were stalled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And pulling lucerne from the rack, recalled<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">What things befell when first this man was hired,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until the lights for lack of oil expired.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seed-time it was, and every other man<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was opening up his furrow save Marran;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who, hanging back, eyed coulter, tackle, share,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As he the like had seen not anywhere.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Till the chief-ploughman spake: “Here is a lout<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To plough for hire! Why, a hog with his snout<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I wager would work better!”—“I will take<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy bet,” said Lou Marran; “and be the stake<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Three golden louis! Either thou or I,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Master, that sum will forfeit presently.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Let blow the trumpet!” Then the ploughmen twain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In two unswerving lines upturn the plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Making for the chosen goal,—two poplars high.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sun-rays gild the ridges equally,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the labourers call out, “Well done!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy furrow, chieftain, is a noble one;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yet, sooth to say, so straight the other is,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One might an arrow shoot the length of this.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Lou Marran was winner,—he who here<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before the baffled council doth appear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All pale, his bitter evidence to bear:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Comrades, as I was whistling, at my share,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Not long ago, methought the land was rough,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And we would stretch, the day to finish off;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, lo! my beasts with fear began to quake,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bristled their hairy sides, their ears lay back.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They stopped; and, with dazed eyes, I saw all round<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The field-herbs fade, and wither to the ground.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I touch my pair. Baiardo sadly eyes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His master, but stirs not. Falet applies<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His nostril to the furrow. Then I lash<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their shins; and, all in terror, off they dash,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that the ash-wood beam—the beam, I say—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is rent, and yoke and tackle borne away.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then grew I pale, and all my breath was gone;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, seized as with a strong convulsion,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I ground my jaws. A dreadful shudder grew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon me,—and my hair upraised, I knew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As thistle-down is raised by the wind’s breath;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But the wind sweeping over me was Death.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Mother of God!” Mirèio’s mother cried<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In torture, “do thou in thy mantle hide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mine own sweet child!” and on her knees she dropped<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With lifted eyes and parted lips: yet stopped<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ere any word was spoken, for she saw<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Antéume, shepherd-chief and milker, draw<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Hurriedly toward them. “And why,” he was panting,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Was she the junipers untimely haunting?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, the ring entering, his tale he told.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“This morn, as we were milking in the fold,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So early that above the bare plain showed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sky yet hob-nailed with the stars of God,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“A soul, a shadow, or a spectre swept<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Across the way. The dogs all silence kept,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As if afraid, and the sheep huddled close.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thought I,—who scarce have time, as master knows,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ever an <i>Ave</i> in the church to offer,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Speak, soul, if thou art blest. If not, go suffer!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then came a voice I knew,—it never varies,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Will none go with me to the holy Maries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of all the shepherds?’ Ere the word was said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Afar over the plain the voice had fled.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wilt thou believe it, master?—it was she,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mirèio!” Cried the people, “Can it be?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“It was herself!” the shepherd-chief replied:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I saw her in the star-light past me glide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Not, surely, as she was in other days,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But lifting up a wan, affrighted face;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereby she was a living soul, I knew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And stung by some exquisite anguish too.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">At this dread word, the labourers groan, and wring<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Each other’s horny palms. “But who will bring,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The stricken mother began wildly shrieking,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“<i>Me</i> to the saints? My bird I must be seeking!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My partridge of the stony field,” she said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I must o’ertake, wherever she has fled.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And if the ants attack her, then these teeth<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall grind them and their hill! If greedy Death<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dare touch my darling rudely, then will I<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Break his old, rusty scythe, and she shall fly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Away across the jungle!” Crying thus,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Jano Mario fled delirious<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Back to the home; while Ramoun order gave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Cartman, set up the cart-tilt, wet the nave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And oil the axle, and without delay<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Harness Moureto. We go far to-day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And it is late.” The mother, in despair,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mounted the cart; and more and more the air<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Resounded with the transports of her woe:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“O pretty dear! O wilderness of Crau!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O endless, briny plains! O dreadful sun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Be kind, I pray you, to the fainting one!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But for her,—the accursèd witch Taven,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who lured my darling into her foul den,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And poured before her, as I know right well,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her philters and her potions horrible,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And made her drink,—now may the demons all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who lured St. Anthony upon her fall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And drag her body o’er the rocks of Baux”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As the unhappy soul lamented so,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Her tones were smothered by the cart’s rude shaking;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the farm-labourers, a last look taking<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To see if none were coming o’er the plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Turned slowly, sadly, to their toil again;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While swarms of gnats, the idle, happy things,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Filled the green walks with sound of humming wings.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
