<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lotus Farm</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">I sing the love of a Provençal maid;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How through the wheat-fields of La Crau she strayed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Following the fate that drew her to the sea.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unknown beyond remote La Crau was she;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And I, who tell the rustic tale of her,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Would fain be Homer’s humble follower.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">What though youth’s aureóle was her only crown?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And never gold she wore nor damask gown?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll build her up a throne out of my song,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hail her queen in our despisèd tongue.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mine be the simple speech that ye all know,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shepherds and farmer-folk of lone La Crau.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">God of my country, who didst have Thy birth<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Among poor shepherds when Thou wast on earth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Breathe fire into my song! Thou knowest, my God,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How, when the lusty summer is abroad,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And figs turn ripe in sun and dew, comes he,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brute, greedy man,—and quite despoils the tree.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Yet on that ravaged tree thou savest oft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Some little branch inviolate aloft,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tender and airy up against the blue,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which the rude spoiler cannot win unto:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Only the birds shall come and banquet there,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, at St. Magdalene’s, the fruit is fair.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Methinks I see yon airy little bough:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It mocks me with its freshness even now;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The light breeze lifts it, and it waves on high<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fruitage and foliage that cannot die.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Help me, dear God, on our Provençal speech,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To soar until the birds’ own home I reach!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Once, then, beside the poplar-bordered Rhone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There lived a basket-weaver and his son,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In a poor hut set round with willow-trees<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">(For all their humble wares were made from these);<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sometimes they from farm to farm would wend,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And horses’ cribs and broken baskets mend.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And so one evening, as they trudged their round<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With osier bundles on their shoulders bound,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Father,” young Vincen said, “the clouds look wild<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">About old Magalouno’s tower up-piled.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If that gray rampart fell, ’twould do us harm:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We should be drenched ere we had gained the farm.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Nay, nay!” the old man said, “no rain to-night!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Tis the sea-breeze that shakes the trees. All right!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A western gale were different.” Vincen mused:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Are many ploughs at Lotus farmstead used?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Six ploughs!” the basket-weaver answered slow:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“It is the finest freehold in La Crau.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Look! There’s their olive-orchard, intermixt<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With rows of vines and almond-trees betwixt.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The beauty of it is, that vineyard hath<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For every day in all the year a path!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There’s ne’er another such the beauty is;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in each path are just so many trees.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O heavens! How many hands at harvest-tide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So many trees must need!” young Vincen cried.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Nay: for ’tis almost Hallowmas, you know,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When all the girls come flocking in from Baux,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, singing, heap with olives green and dun<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sheets and sacks, and call it only fun.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The sun was sinking, as old Ambroi said;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On high were little clouds a-flush with red;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sideways upon their yokèd cattle rode<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The labourers slowly home, each with his goad<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Erect. Night darkened on the distant moor;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twas supper-time, the day of toil was o’er.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And here we are!” the boy cried. “I can see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The straw-heaped threshing-floor, so hasten we!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“But stay!” the other. “Now, as I’m alive,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Lotus Farm’s the place for sheep to thrive,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pine-woods all the summer, and the sweep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the great plain in winter. Lucky sheep!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And look at the great trees that shade the dwelling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And look at that delicious stream forth welling<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Inside the vivary! And mark the bees!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Autumn makes havoc in their colonies;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But every year, when comes the bright May weather,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yon lotus-grove a hundred swarms will gather.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And one thing more” cried Vincen, eagerly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The very best of all, it seems to me,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I mean the maiden, father, who dwells here.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou canst not have forgotten how, last year,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She bade us bring her olive-baskets two,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And fit her little one with handles new.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So saying, they drew the farm-house door a-nigh,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, in the dewy twilight, saw thereby<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The maid herself. Distaff in hand she stood,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Watching her silk-worms at their leafy food.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then master Ambroi let his osiers fall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sang out cheerily, “Good-even, all!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Father, the same to you!” the damsel said.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I had come out my distaff-point to thread,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It grows so dark. Whence come you now, I pray?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From Valabrègo?” Ambroi answered, “Yea.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I said, when the fast-coming dark I saw,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘We’ll sleep at Lotus Farm upon the straw.’”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Whereat, with no more words, father and son<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hard by upon a roller sat them down,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And fell to their own work right busily.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A half-made cradle chanced the same to be.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fast through the nimble fingers of the two<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The supple osier bent and crossed and flew.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Certes, our Vincen was a comely lad.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A bright face and a manly form he had,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Albeit that summer he was bare sixteen.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swart were his cheeks; but the dark soil, I ween,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bears the fine wheat, and black grapes make the wine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That sets our feet a-dance, our eyes a-shine.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Full well he knew the osier to prepare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And deftly wrought: but ofttimes to his share<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fell coarser work; for he the panniers made<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wherewith the farmers use their beasts to lade,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And divers kinds of baskets, huge and rough,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Handy and light. Ay, he had skill enough!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And likewise brooms of millet-grass, and such,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And baskets of split-cane. And still his touch<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was sure and swift; and all his wares were strong,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And found a ready sale the farms among.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now, from fallow field and moorland vast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The labourers were trooping home at last.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then hasted sweet Mirèio to prepare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With her own hands and in the open air,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their evening meal. There was a broad flat stone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Served for a table, and she set thereon<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One mighty dish, where each man plunged his ladle.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our weavers wrought meanwhile upon their cradle.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Until Ramoun, the master of the farm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Cried, “How is this?”—brusque was his tone and warm.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Come to your supper, Ambroi: no declining!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Put up the crib, my man: the stars are shining.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And thou, Mirèio, run and fetch a bowl:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The travellers must be weary, on my soul!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Wherefore the basket-weaver, well-content,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rose with his son and to the table went,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sat him down and cut the bread for both;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While bright Mirèio hasted, nothing loth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seasoned a dish of beans with olive oil,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And came and sat before them with a smile.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Not quite fifteen was this same fair Mirèio.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, me! the purple coast of Font Vièio,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hills of Baux, the desolate Crau plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A shape like hers will hardly see again.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Child of the merry sun, her dimpled face<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bloomed into laughter with ingenious grace.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Eyes had she limpid as the drops of dew;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, when she fixed their tender gaze on you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sorrow was not. Stars in a summer night<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are not more softly, innocently bright:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And beauteous hair, all waves and rings of jet;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And breasts, a double peach, scarce ripened yet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Shy, yet a joyous little sprite she was;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, finding all her sweetness in a glass,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You would have drained it at a single breath.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But to our tale, which somewhat lingereth.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When every man his day’s toil had rehearsed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">(So, at my father’s farm, I heard them first),—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now, Ambroi, for a song!” they all began:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Let us not sleep above our supper, man!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But he, “Peace! peace! My friends, do ye not know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On every jester, God, they say, doth blow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sets him spinning like a top along?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sing yourselves, lads,—you who are young and strong.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“No jest, good father, none!” they answered him.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“But, since the wine o’erflows your goblet’s brim,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Drink with us, Ambroi, and then to your song!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ay, ay, when I was young—but that was long<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ago—I’d sing to any man’s desire;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now my voice is but a broken lyre.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But, Master Ambroi,” urged Mirèio,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Sing one song, please, because ’twill cheer us so.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“My pretty one,” the weaver said again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Only the husks of my old voice remain;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But if these please you, I cannot say nay,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And drained his goblet, and began straightway:—<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">Our Captain was Bailly Suffren;<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">We had sailed from Toulon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Five hundred sea-faring Provençaux,<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Stout-hearted and strong:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">’Twas the sweet hope of meeting the English that made our hearts burn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And till we had thrashed them we vowed we would never return.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">But all the first month of our cruise<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">We saw never a thing<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">From the shrouds, save hundreds and hundreds<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Of gulls on the wing;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in the next dolorous month, we’d a tempest to fight,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And had to be bailing out water by day and by night.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">By the third, we were driven to madness<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">At meeting no foe<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">For our thundering cannon to sweep<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">From the ocean. When lo!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Hands aloft!” Captain cried. At the maintop one heard the command,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the long Arab coast on the lee-bow intently he scanned.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">Till, “God’s thunder!” he cried. “Three big vessels<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Bear down on us strong;<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Run the guns to the ports! Blaze away!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Shouted Bailly Suffren.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Sharp’s the word, gallant lads! Our figs of Antibes they shall test,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And see how they like those,” Captain said, “ere we offer the rest!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">A crash fit to deafen! Before<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">The words left his lips<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">We had sent forty balls through the hulls<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Of the Englishers’ ships!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One was done for already. And now the guns only heard we,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The cracking of wood and perpetual groan of the sea.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">And now we were closing. Oh, rapture!<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">We lay alongside,<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Our gallant commander stood cool<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">On the deck, and he cried,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Well done, my brave boys! But enough! Cease your firing, I say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the time has come now to anoint them with oil of Aix.”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">Then we sprang to our dirks and our hatchets,<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">As they had been toys;<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">And, grapnel in hand, the Provençal<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Cried, “Board ’em, my boys!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A shout and a leap, and we stood on the Englishers’ deck;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And then, ah, ’twas then we were ready our vengeance to wreak!<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">Then, oh, the great slaughter! The crash<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Of the mainmast ensuing!<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">And the blows and the turmoil of men<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Fighting on ’mid the ruin!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">More than one wild Provençal I saw seize a foe in his place,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hug till he strained his own life out in deadly embrace.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And then old Ambroi paused. “Ah, yes!” said he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“You do not quite believe my tale, I see.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nathless these things all happened, understand:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Did I not hold the tiller with this hand?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Were I to live a thousand years, I say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I should remember what befell that day.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“What, father, you were there and saw the fun?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The labourers cried in mischief. “Three to one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They flattened you like scythes beneath the hammer!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Who, me? The English?” the old tar ’gan stammer,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upspringing; then, with smile of fine disdain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Took up the burden of his tale again:—<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">So with blood-dabbled feet fought we on<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Four hours, until dark.<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Then, our eyes being cleared of the powder,<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">We missed from our bark<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fivescore men. But the king of the English lost ships of renown:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Three good vessels with all hands on board to the bottom went down.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">And now, our sides riddled with shot,<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">Once more homeward hie we,<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Yards splintered, mast shivered, sails tattered;<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">But brave Captain Bailly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Spake us words of good cheer. “My comrades, ye have done well!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the great king of Paris the tale of your valour I’ll tell!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">“Well said, Captain dear!” we replied:<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">“Sure the king will hear you<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">When you speak. But for us, his poor mariners,<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">What will he do,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who left our all gladly, our homes and our firesides,” we said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For his sake, and lo! now in those homes there is crying for bread?<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i6">“Ah, Admiral, never forget<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">When all bow before you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">With a love like the love of your seamen<br/></span>
						<span class="i8">None will adore you!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Why, say but the word, and, ere homeward our footsteps we turn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Aloft on the tips of our fingers a king you are borne!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i4">A Martigau, mending his nets<br/></span>
						<span class="i5">One eve, made this ditty.<br/></span>
						<span class="i4">Our admiral bade us farewell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i5">And sought the great city.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Were they wroth with his glory up there at the court? Who can say?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But we saw our beloved commander no more from that day!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A timely ending thus the minstrel made,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Else the fast-coming tears his tale had stayed;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But for the labourers—they sat intent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mute all, with parted lips, and forward bent<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As if enchanted. Even when he was done,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For a brief space they seemed to hearken on.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And such were aye the songs,” said the old man,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Sung in the good old days when Martha span.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Long-winded, maybe, and the tunes were queer.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, youngsters, what of that? They suit my ear.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your new French airs mayhap may finer be;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But no one understands the words, you see!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Whereon the men, somewhat as in a dream,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From table rose, and to the running stream<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They led their patient mules, six yoke in all.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The long vine-branches from a trellised wall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Waved o’er them waiting, and, from time to time,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Humming some fragment of the weaver’s rhyme.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Mirèio tarried, but not quite alone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A social spirit had the little one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And she and Vincen chatted happily.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Twas a fair sight, the two young heads to see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Meeting and parting, coming still and going<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like aster-flowers when merry winds are blowing.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now tell me, Vincen,” thus Mirèio,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“If oftentimes as you and Ambrio go<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bearing your burdens the wild country over,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Some haunted castle you do not discover,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or joyous fête, or shining palace meet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While the home-nest is evermore our seat.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“’Tis even so, my lady, as you think.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Why, currants quench the thirst as well as drink!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What though we brave all weathers in our toil?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sure, we have joys that rain-drops cannot spoil<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sun of noon beats fiercely on the head,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But there are wayside trees unnumberèd.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And whenso’er return the summer hours,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And olive-trees are all bedecked with flowers,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We hunt the whitening orchards curiously,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Still following the scent, till we descry<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the hot noontide, by its emerald flash,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tiny cantharis upon the ash.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The shops will buy the same. Or off we tramp<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And gather red-oak apples in the swamp,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or beat the pond for leeches. Ah, that’s grand!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You need nor bait nor hook, but only stand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And strike the water, and then one by one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They come and seize your legs, and all is done.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And thou wert never at Li Santo even!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dear heart! The singing there must be like heaven.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Tis there they bring the sick from all about<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For healing; and the church is small, no doubt:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, ah, what cries they lift! what vows they pay<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the great saints! We saw it one fête-day.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“It was the year of the great miracle.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My God, that was a sight! I mind it well.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A feeble boy, beautiful as Saint John,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lay on the pavement, sadly calling on<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The saints to give sight to his poor blind eyes,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And promising his pet lamb in sacrifice.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“‘My little lamb, with budding horns!’ he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Dear saints!’ How we all wept! Then from o’erhead<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blessed reliquaries came down slowly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Above the throngèd people bending lowly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And crying, ‘Come, great saints, mighty and good!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Come, save!’ The church was like a wind-swept wood.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then the godmother held the child aloft,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who spread abroad his fingers pale and soft,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And passionately grasped the reliquaries<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That held the bones of the three blessed Maries;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Just as a drowning man, who cannot swim,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will clutch a plank the sea upheaves to him.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And then, oh! then,—I saw it with these eyes,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By faith illumined, the blind boy outcries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘I see the sacred relics, and I see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Grandmother all in tears! Now haste,’ said he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘My lambkin with the budding horns to bring<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the dear saints for a thank-offering!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But thou, my lady, God keep thee, I pray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Handsome and happy as thou art to-day!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet if a lizard, wolf, or horrid snake<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ever should wound thee with its fang, betake<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thyself forthwith to the most holy saints,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who cure all ills and hearken all complaints.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So the hours of the summer evening passed.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hard-by the big-wheeled cart its shadow cast<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the white yard. Afar arose and fell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The frequent tinkle of a little bell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the dark marsh: a nightingale sang yonder;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">An owl made dreamy, sorrowful rejoinder.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now, since the night is moonlit, so the mere<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And trees are glorified, wilt thou not hear,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The boy besought, “the story of a race<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In which I hoped to win the prize?”—“Ah, yes!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The little maiden sighed; and, more than glad,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Still gazed with parted lips upon the lad.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Well, then, Mirèio, once at Nismes,” he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“They had foot-races on the esplanade;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And on a certain day a crowd was there<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Collected, thicker than a shock of hair.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Some shoeless, coatless, hatless, were to run:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The others only came to see the fun.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“When all at once upon the scene appears<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One Lagalanto, prince of foot-racers.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In all Provence, and even in Italy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fleetest-footed far behind left he.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yes: Lagalanto, the great Marseillais,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou wilt have heard his name before to-day.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“A leg, a thigh, he had would not look small<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By John of Cossa’s, the great seneschal;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in his dresser many a pewter plate,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With all his victories carved thereon in state;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And you’d have said, to see his scarfs, my lady,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A wainscot all festooned with rainbows had he.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The other runners, of whate’er condition,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Threw on their clothes at this dread apparition:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The game was up when Lagalanto came.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Only one stout-limbed lad, Lou Cri by name,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who into Nismes had driven cows that day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Durst challenge the victorious Marseillais.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Whereon, ‘Oh, bah!’ cried foolish little I<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">(Just think!—I only chanced to stand thereby),<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘I can run too!’ Forthwith they all surround me:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Run, then!’ Alas! my foolish words confound me;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For I had run with partridges alone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And only the old oaks for lookers-on.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But now was no escape. ‘My poor boy, hasten,’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Says Lagalanto, ‘and your latchets fasten.’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Well, so I did. And the great man meanwhile<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Drew o’er his mighty muscles, with a smile,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A pair of silken hose, whereto were sewn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ten tiny golden bells of sweetest tone.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So ’twas we three. Each set between his teeth<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A bit of willow, thus to save his breath;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shook hands all round; then, one foot on the line,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Trembling and eager we await the sign<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For starting. It is given. Off we fly;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We scour the plain like mad,—’tis you! ’tis I!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Wrapped in a cloud of dust, with smoking hair,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We strain each nerve. Ah, what a race was there!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They thought we should have won the goal abreast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till I, presumptuous, sprang before the rest:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And that was my undoing; for I dropped<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pale, dying as it seemed. But never stopped<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The others. On, on, on, with steady gait,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Just like the pasteboard horses at Aix fête.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The famous Marseillais thought he must win<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">(They used to say of him he had no spleen);<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, ah! my lady, on that day of days,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He found his man,—Lou Cri of Mouriès.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“For now they pass beyond the gazing line,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And almost touch the goal. O beauty mine!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Couldst thou have seen Lou Cri leap forward then!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Never, I think, in mountain, park, or glen,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A stag, a hare, so fleet of foot you’d find.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Howled like a wolf the other, just behind.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Lou Cri is victor!—hugs the post for joy.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then all of Nismes comes flocking round the boy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To learn the birthplace of this wondrous one.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pewter plate is flashing in the sun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hautboys flourish, cymbals clang apace,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As he receives the guerdon of the race.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And Lagalanto?” asks Mirèio.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Why, he upon the ground was sitting low,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Powdered with dust, the shifting folk among,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clasping his knees. With shame his soul was wrung<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, with the drops that from his forehead fell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Came tears of bitterness unspeakable.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Lou Cri approached, and made a modest bow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Brother, let’s to the ale-house arbour now,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Behind the amphitheatre. Why borrow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon this festive day, tears for the morrow?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The money left we’ll drink together thus:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There’s sunshine yet enough for both of us.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then trembling rose the runner of Marseilles,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And from his limbs made haste to tear away<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The silken hose, the golden bells. ‘Here, lad’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Raising his pallid face, ‘take them!’ he said.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘I am grown old; youth decks thee like a swan;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So put the strong man’s gear with honour on.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“He turned, stricken like an ash the storm bereaves<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In summer-time of all its tower of leaves.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The king of runners vanished from the place;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And never more ran he in any race,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor even leaped on the inflated hide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In games at Saint John’s or St. Peter’s tide.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So Vincen told the story, waxing warm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of all he’d seen, before the Lotus Farm.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His cheeks grew red, his eyes were full of light;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He waved his hand to point his speech aright,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Abundant was the same as showers in May<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That fall upon a field of new-mown hay.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The crickets, chirruping amid the dew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Paused more than once to listen. Often, too,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bird of evening, the sweet nightingale,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Kept silence; thrilling so at Vincen’s tale,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As aye she harked her leafy perch upon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She might have kept awake until the dawn.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh, mother!” cried Mirèio, “surely never<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was weaver-lad so marvellously clever!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I love to sleep, dear, on a winter night;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now I cannot,—it is all too light.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, just one story more before we go,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For I could pass a lifetime listening so!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
