<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Old Men</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Fixing a troubled eye on the old man,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vincen to Master Ambroi thus began,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The while a mighty wind, the poplars bending,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Its howl unto the poor lad’s voice was lending:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I am mad, father, as I oft of late<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Have said. Thinkest thou I’m jesting when I say’t?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Before his nut-shell cot the Rhone beside<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sat Ambroi on a fallen trunk, and plied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His trade. And, as he peeled the osier withe,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vincen received it, and, with fingers lithe<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And strong, bent the white rods to basket form,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sitting upon the door-stone. With the storm<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Of wind was the Rhone’s bosom agitated,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The waves drove seaward like a herd belated;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But round about the but an azure mere<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Spread tranquilly. The billows brake not here:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A pleasant shelter gave the willow-trees,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And beavers gnawed their bitter bark in peace.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">While yonder, through the deep of limpid water,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Darted at intervals the dark brown otter,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Following the silver-flashing fish. Among<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The reeds and willows, pendulines had hung<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their tiny nests, white woven with the wool<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Plucked from the poplar when its flowers are full.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And here the small things fluttered full of glee,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or swang on wind-rocked stems right lazily.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here, too, a sprightly lassie, golden-haired,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Head like a crown-cake!—back and forward fared,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And spread on a fig-tree a fishing-net<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unwieldy and with water dripping yet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Birds, beavers, otters, feared the maid no more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Than whispering reeds or willows of the shore.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">This was the daughter of the basket-weaver,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The little Vinceneto. No one ever<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had even bored her ears, poor child! yet so<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her eyes were damson-blue, her bosom low,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A caper-blossom by the river-side,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wooed by the splashing of the amorous tide.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now old Ambroi, with his long white beard<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Flowing o’er all his breast, his head upreared,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And answered Vincen’s outcry: “What is’t? Mad?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You are a blockhead! that is all, my lad!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ah!” said the other, “for the ass to stray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sweet must the mead be. But what do I say?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou knowest her! If she to Arles should fare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All other maids would hide them in despair;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For, after her, I think the mould was broken.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And what say to the words herself hath spoken,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“‘You I will have!’”—“Why, naught, poor fool! say I:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let poverty and riches make reply!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“O father!” Vincen cried, “go, I implore thee,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To Lotus Farm, and tell them all the story!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell them to look for virtue, not for gain!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell them that I can plough a stony plain,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Or harrow, or prune vines with any man!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell them their six yoke, with my guiding, can<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Plough double! Tell them I revere the old;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, if they part us for the sake of gold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We shall both die, and they may bury us!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Oh, fie! But you are young who maunder thus,”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Quoth Master Ambroi. “All this talk I know.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The white hen’s egg, the chaffinch on the bough,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You’ll have the pretty bird this very minute!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whistle, bring sugared cake, or die to win it;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet will the chaffinch never come, be sure,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And perch upon your finger! You are poor!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Plague on my poverty!” poor Vincen cried,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tearing his hair. “Is God who hath denied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All that could make life worthy,—is He just?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wherefore are we poor? And wherefore must<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We still the refuse of the vineyard gather,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While others pluck the purple clusters rather?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Lifting his hands, the old man sternly said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Weave on, and drive this folly from your head!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall the corn-ears rebuke the reaper, pray?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or silly worm to God the Father say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Why am I not a star in heaven to shine?’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or shall the ox to be a drover pine,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So to eat corn instead of straw? Nay, nay!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Through good and ill we all must hold our way.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hand’s five fingers were unequal made.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Be you a lizard, as your Master bade,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dwell content upon your wall apart,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And drink your sunbeam with a thankful heart!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I tell thee, father, I this maid adore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">More than my sister, than my Maker more;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And if I have her not, ’tis death, I say!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then to the rough stream Vincen fled away;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While little Vinceneto burst out weeping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let fall her net, and near the weaver creeping,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O father! ere thou drive my brother wild,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Listen to me!” began the eager child:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For where I served the master had a daughter;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And had a labourer, too, who loved and sought her,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Just as our Vincen loves Mirèio.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She was named Alis; he, Sivèstre: and so<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“He laboured like a wolf because he loved.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Skilful and prompt, quiet and saving proved,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And took such care, master slept tranquilly;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But once—mark, father, how perverse men be!—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One morning master’s wife, as it befell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O’erheard Sivèstre his love to Alis tell.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So when at dinner all the men were sitting,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The master gave Sivèstre a wrathful greeting.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Traitor!’ he cried, with his eyes all aglow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘You are discovered! Take your wage, and go!’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We looked at one another in dismay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As the good servant rose, and went his way.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Thereafter, for three weeks, when we were working,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We used to see him round the farmstead lurking,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A sorry sight; for all his clothes were torn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And his face very pale and wild and worn.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And oft at eve he to the trellis came,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And called the little mistress by her name.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Erelong the hay-rick at its corners four<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Burnt all a-flame. And, father, something more!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They drew a drownèd man out of the well.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then Ambroi, in gruff tones half-audible,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“A little child a little trouble gives,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And more and more for every year he lives.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Therewith put his long spatterdashes on<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which he himself had made in days bygone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His hobnailed shoes, and long red cap, and so<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Straightway set forth upon the road to Crau.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twas harvest-time, the eve of St. John’s day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hedgerow paths were crowded all the way<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">With troops of dusty, sunburnt mountaineers<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hired for the reaping of the golden ears.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In fig-wood quivers were their sickles borne,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Slung to a belt across the shoulder worn.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By twos and twos they came, and every pair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had its own sheaf-binder. And carts were there,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Bearing the weary elders, and beside<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pipes and tambourines with ribbons tied.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Anon by fields of beardless wheat they passed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lashed into billows by the noisy blast;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And “Mon Dieu, but that is noble grain!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They cried. “What tufts of ears! There shall we gain<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Right pleasant reaping! The wind bows them over;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But see you not how quickly they recover?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is all the wheat-crop of Provence thus cheering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Grandfather?” asked a youth, old Ambroi nearing.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The red is backward still,” he made reply;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“But, if this windy weather last, deem I<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Sickles will fail us ere the work be done.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How like three stars the Christmas candles shone!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That was a blessed sign of a good year!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Now, grandfather, may the good God thee hear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in thy granary the same fulfil!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So Ambroi and the reapers chatted still<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">In friendly wise, under the willows wending;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For these as well to Lotus Farm were tending.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It also chanced that Master Ramoun went<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That eve to hearken for the wheat’s complaint<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Against the wind, wild waster of the grain;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, as he strode over the yellow plain<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">From north to south, he heard the golden corn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Murmuring, “See the ills that we have borne,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Master, from this great gale. It spills our seed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And blurs our bloom!”—“Put on your gloves of reed,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sang others, “else the ants will be more fleet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And rob us of our all but hardened wheat.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“When will the sickles come?” And Ramoun turned<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toward the trees, and even then discerned<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The reapers rising in the distance dim;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who, as they nearer drew, saluted him<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With waving sickles flashing in the sun.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then roared the master, “Welcome, every one!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“A very God-send!” cried he, loud and long;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And soon the sheaf-binders about him throng,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Saying, “Shake hands! Why, Holy Cross, look here!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What heaps of sheaves, good master, will this year<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Cumber your treading-floor!”—“Mayhap,” said he:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“We cannot alway judge by what we see.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Till all is trod, the truth will not be known.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I have known years that promised,” he went on,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Eighty full bushels to the acre fairly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And yielded in their stead a dozen barely.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet let us be content!” And, with a smile,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He shook their hands all round in friendly style,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And gossiped with old Ambroi affably.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So entered all the homestead path, and he<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Called out once more, “Come forth, Mirèio mine:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Prepare the chiccory and draw the wine!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And she right lavishly the table spread;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While Ramoun first him seated at its head,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And the rest in their order, for the lunch.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forthwith the labourers began to crunch<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hard-crusted bread their sturdy teeth between,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hail the salad made of goats-beard green;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While fair as an oat-leaf the table shone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in superb profusion heaped thereon<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Were odorous cheese, onions and garlic hot,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Grilled egg-plant, fiery peppers, and what not,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To sting the palate. Master Ramoun poured<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The wine, king in the field and at the board;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Raising his mighty flagon now and then,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And calling for a bumper on the men.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“To keep the sickles keen on stony ground,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They must be often whetted, I have found.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The reapers held their goblets, bidden so,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And red and clear the wine began to flow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ay, whet the blades!” the cheery master cries;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And furthermore gives order in this wise:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now eat your fill, and all your strength restore.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But go thereafter, as you used of yore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And branches in the copse-wood cut, and bring<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In fagots; thus a great heap gathering.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And when ’tis night, my lads, we’ll do the rest!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For this the fête is of Saint John the blest,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Saint John the reaper, and the friend of God.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So spake the lord of all these acres broad.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The high and noble art of husbandry,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The rule of men, none better knew than he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or how to make a golden harvest grow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From dark sods moistened by the toiler’s brow.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A grave and simple master of the soil,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose frame was bending now with years and toil;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet oft, of old, when floors were full of wheat,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Glowing with pride he had performed the feat,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before his youthful corps, upright to stand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bearing two pecks upon each horny hand.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">He could the influence of the moon rehearse;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell when her look is friendly, when adverse;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When she will raise the sap, and when depress;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The coming weather from her halo guess,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And from her silver-pale or fiery face.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clear signs to him were birds and keen March days,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And mouldy bread and noisome August fogs,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">St. Clara’s dawn, the rainbow-hued sun-dogs,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wet seasons, times of drought and frost and plenty.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Full oft, in pleasant years, a-ploughing went he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With six fair, handsome beasts. And, verily,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Myself have seen, and it was good to see,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The soil part silently before the share,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And its dark bosom to the sun lay bare:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The comely mules, ne’er from the furrow breaking,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toiled on as though they care and thought were taking<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For what they did. With muzzles low they went,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And arching necks like bows when these are bent,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And hasted not, nor lagged. Followed along—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Eye on the mules, and on his lips a song—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The ploughman, with one handle only guiding.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So, in the realm where we have seen presiding<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our old friend Ramoun, flourished every thing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And he bare sceptre like a very king.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Now says he grace, and lifts his eyes above,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And signs the holy cross. The labourers move<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Away to make the bonfire ready. These<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bring kindling; those, the boughs of dark pine-trees;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the old men alone at table staying,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A silence fell. But Ambroi brake it, saying,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“For counsel, Ramoun, am I come to thee;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For I am in a great perplexity<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou only canst resolve. Cure see I none.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou knowest, Master, that I have a son<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who has been passing good until this day,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It were ingratitude aught else to say;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But there are flaws even in precious stones,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And tender lambs will have convulsions,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the still waters are perfidious ever:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So my mad boy,—thou wilt believe it never,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He loves the daughter of a rich freeholder,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And swears he will in his embrace enfold her!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ay, swears he will, the maniac! And his love<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And his despair my soul to terror move.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I showed him all his folly, be thou sure,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And how wealth gains, and poverty grows poor<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In this hard world. In vain! He would but call,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Cost what it may, tell thou her parents all,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“‘Tell them to look for virtue, not for gain!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell them that I can plough a stony plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or harrow, or prune vines with any man!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell them their six yoke, with my guiding, can<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Plough double! Tell them I revere the old;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, if they part us for the sake of gold,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“‘We shall both die, and need but burial.’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now, Master Ramoun, I have told thee all.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall I, clad in my rags, for this maid sue,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or leave my son to die of sorrow?”—“Whew!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The other. “To such wind spread thou no sail!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor he, nor she, will perish of this ail.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So much, good friend, I say in utmost faith.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor would I, Ambroi, fret myself to death<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If I were thou; but, seeing him so mad,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I would say plainly, ‘Calm your mind, my lad!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For if you raise a tempest by your passions,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll teach you with a cudgel better fashions!’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If an ass, Ambroi, for more fodder bray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Throw him none down, but let thy bludgeon play.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Provençal families in days bygone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Were healthy, brave, and evermore at one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And strong as plane-trees when a storm befell.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They had their strifes, indeed,—we know it well;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But, when returned the holy Christmas eve,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The grandsire all his children would receive<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At his own board, under a star-sown tent;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And ceased the voice of strife and all dissent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, lifting hands that wrinkled were and trembled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He blessed the generations there assembled.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Moreover, he who is a father truly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will have his child yield him obedience duly:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The flock that drives the shepherd, soon or late,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will meet a wolf and a disastrous fate.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When we were young, had any son withstood<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His father, he, belike, had shed his blood!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Thou wilt kill me then, father! It is I<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whom Vincen worships thus despairingly;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And before God and our most holy Mother,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I give my soul to him, and to no other!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A deathlike hush followed Mirèio’s word.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The wife of Ramoun was the first who stirred.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Upspringing with clasped hands and utterance wild,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Your speech is an atrocious insult, child!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your love’s a thorn that long hath stung us deep.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alari, the owner of a thousand sheep,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You sent away; and keeper Veran too,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Disgusted with your scorn, his suit withdrew;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Also the wealthy herdsman, Ourrias,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You treated as a dog and a scapegrace!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tramp through the country with your beggar, then!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Herd with strange women and with outcast men!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And cook your pot with fortune-telling crones<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under a bridge mayhap, upon three stones.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Go, gypsy, you are free!” the mother said;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor stayed Ramoun her pitiless tirade,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Though his eye like a taper burned. But now<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The lightning flashed under his shaggy brow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And his wrath brake, all barriers overbearing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like swollen torrent down a mountain tearing.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Your mother’s right!” he said. “Go! travel yonder,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And take the tempest with you where you wander!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nay, but you shall not! Here you shall remain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Though I should bind you with an iron chain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or hold like a rebellious jumart, look!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dragged by the nostrils with an iron hook!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yea, though you pine with sickly melancholy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till from your cheeks the roses perish wholly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or fade as snow fades when the sun is hot<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the hill-sides in spring, go shall you not!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And mark, Mirèio! Sure as the hearth’s ashes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rest on that brick, and sure as the Rhone dashes<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Above its banks when it is overfull,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sure as that’s a lamp, and here I rule,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You’ll see him never more!” The table leapt<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beneath his fist. Mirèio only wept.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her heavy tears like dew on smallage rain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or grapes o’er ripe before a hurricane.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And who,” resumed the old man, blind with rage,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Curse it!—I say, who, Ambroi, will engage<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou didst not with the younger ruffian plot<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">This vile abduction, yonder in thy cot?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then Ambroi also sprang infuriate,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Good God!” he cried, “we are of low estate;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But let me tell you that our hearts are high!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No shame, no stain, is honest poverty!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ve served my country forty years or more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On shipboard, and I know the cannon’s roar,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So young that I could scarce a boat-hook swing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When on my first cruise I went wandering.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I’ve seen Melinda’s empire far away,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And with Suffren have haunted India,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And done my duty over all the world<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the great wars, where’er our flag unfurled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That southern chief who passed his conquering hand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With one red sweep from Spain to Russian land,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And at whose drum-beat every clime was quaking<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like aspen-tree before the tempest shaking;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Horrors of boarding, shipwreck’s agonies,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These have I known, and darker things than these,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Days than the sea more bitter. Being poor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No bit of motherland might I secure.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Scorned of the rich, I might not dress the sward,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But suffer forty years without reward.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We ate dog’s food, on the hoar-frost we lay:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Weary of life, we rushed into the fray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And so upbore the glorious name of France.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But no one holds it in remembrance!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">His caddis-cloak upon the ground he threw,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And spake no more. “What great thing wilt thou do?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Asked Ramoun, and his tone was full of scorn.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I, too, have heard the cannon-thunder borne<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Along the valley of Toulon, have seen<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bridge of Arcole stormed, and I have been<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“In Egypt when her sands were red with gore;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But we, like men, when those great wars were o’er,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Returning, fiercely fell upon the soil,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dried our very marrow up with toil<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The day began long ere the eastern glow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The rising moon surprised us at the hoe.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“They say the Earth is generous. It is true!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, like a nut-tree, naught she gives to you<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unless well-beaten. And if all were known,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Each clod of landed ease thus hardly won,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He who should number them would also know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sweat-drops that have fallen from my brow.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And must I, by Ste. Anne of Apt, be still?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like satyr toil, of siftings eat my fill,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That all the homestead may grow wealthy, and<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Myself before the world with honour stand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet go and give my daughter to a tramp,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A vagabond, a straw-loft-sleeping scamp?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“God’s thunder strike you and your dog! Begone!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But I,” the master said, “will keep my swan.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These were his last rough words; and steadily<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ambroi arose, and his cloak lifted he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And only rested on his staff to say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Adieu! Mayst thou not regret this day!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And may the good God and his angels guide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The orange-laden bark across the tide!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, as he passed into the falling night,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From the branch-heap arose a ruddy light,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And one long tongue of flame the wanderer sees,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Curled like a horn by the careering breeze;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And round it reapers dancing blithesomely,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With pulsing feet, and haughty heads and free<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thrown back, and faces by the bonfire lit,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Loud crackling as the night-wind fanneth it.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sound of coals that to the brazier fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Blends with the fife-notes fine but musical,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And merry as the song of the hedge-sparrow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, but it thrills the old Earth to her marrow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When thou dost visit her, beloved St. John!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sparks went whirling upward, and hummed on<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tabor gravely and incessantly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like the low surging of a tranquil sea.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then did the dusky troop their sickle wave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And three great leaps athwart the flame they gave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And cloves of odorous garlic from a string<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the glowing embers they did fling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And holy herb and John’s-wort bare anigh;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And these were purified and blessed thereby.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then “Hail, St. John!” thrice rose a deafening shout;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hills and plain, illumined round about,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sparkled as though the dark were showering stars.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sure the Saint, above the heaven’s blue bars,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The breath of all this incense doth inhale,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wafted aloft by the unconscious gale.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
