<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CANTO_XII" name="CANTO_XII"/>CANTO XII.<br/>
			<br/>
			<i>Death.</i></h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">As, when in orange-lands God’s day is ending,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The maids let fly the leafy boughs, and, lending<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A helpful hand, the laden baskets lift<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On head or hip, and fishing-boats adrift<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are drawn ashore, and, following the sun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The golden clouds evanish, one by one;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">As the full harmonies of eventide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swelling from hill and plain and river-side<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Along the sinuous Argens,—airy notes<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of pastoral pipe, love-songs, and bleat of goats,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Grow fainter, and then wholly fade away,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sombre night falls on the mountains gray;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Or as the last sigh of an anthem soft,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or dying organ-peal, is borne aloft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O’er some old church, and on the wandering wind<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Passes afar,—so passed the music twined<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of the three Maries’ voices, heavenward carried.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For her, she seemed asleep; for yet she tarried<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Kneeling: and was more fair than ever now,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So strange a freak of sunlight crowned her brow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And here they who had sought her through the wild,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The aged parents, came, and found their child;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet stayed their faltering steps the portal under,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To gaze on her entranced with awe and wonder;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then crossed their foreheads with the holy water,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, hasting o’er the sounding flags, besought her<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To wake. But, as a frighted vireo<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who spies the huntsman, shrieked Mirèio,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“O God, what is it? Father, mother, tell!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where will you go?” And therewith swooned and fell.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The weeping mother lifts her head, and yearns<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over her. “My sweet, your forehead burns!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What means it?” And again, “No dream is this.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My own sweet child,—my very own it is,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Low lying at my feet!” And then she wept<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And laughed together; and old Ramoun crept<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Beside them. “Little darling, it is I,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your father, has your hand!” Then suddenly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His anguish choked him, and he could but hold<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And chafe and strive to warm those fingers cold.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Meanwhile the wind the mournful tidings bore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Abroad, and all Li Santo thronged the door,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And anxiously. “Bear the sick child,” they say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Into the upper chapel, nor delay;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And let her touch the dear Saints’ relics thus<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Within their reliquaries marvellous;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or kiss, at least, with dying lips!” And there<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Two women raised, and bore her up the stair.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">In this fair church, altars and chapels three,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Built one upon the other, you may see,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of solid stone. In that beneath the ground<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dusky gypsies kneel, with awe profound,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before Saint Sarah. One is over it<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That hath God’s altar. And one higher yet,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">On pillars borne,—last of the sanctuaries,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The small, funereal chapel of the Maries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With heavenward vault. And here long years have lain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rich legacy,—whence falleth grace like rain!—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The ever-blessed relics. Four great keys<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Enlock the cypress chests that shelter these.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Once are they opened in each hundred years;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And happy, happy shall he be who nears<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sees and touches them! Upon the wave<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bright star and weather fair his bark shall have,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His trees be with abundant fruitage graced,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His faithful soul eternal blessing taste!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">An oaken door, with carvings rich and rare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gift of the pious people of Beaucaire,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Closes the holy precinct. And yet surely<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That which defends is not the portal purely,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is not the circling rampart; but the grace<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Descending from the azure depths of space.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So to the chapel bare they the sick child,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While up the winding stair the folk defiled;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, as a white-robed priest threw wide the door,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They, entering, fell on the dusty floor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As falls full-bearded barley when a squall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hath smitten it, and worshipped one and all.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O lovely Saints! O friendly Saints!” they said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“O Saints of God, pity this poor young maid!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Pity her!” sobbed the mother. “I will bring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When she is well, so fair an offering!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My flower-carved cross, my golden ring!” she cried,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“And tell the tale through town and country-side!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O Saints,” groaned Ramoun, stumbling in the gloom<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While shook his aged head, “be kind, and come!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Look on this little one! She is my treasure!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She is my plover! Pretty beyond measure,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And good and meet for life! Send my old bones<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To dung the mallows, but save her!” he moans.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And all the while Mirèio lay in swoon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till a breeze, with declining afternoon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Blew from the tamarisks. Then, hoping still<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To call her back to life, they raised with skill,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The flower of Lotus Farm, and tenderly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Laid on the tiles that overlook the sea.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">There, from the doorway leading on the tiles,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The chapel’s eye,—one’s vision roams for miles,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Even to the pallid limit of the brine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blending and the separating line<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Between the clouds and waters to explore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the great waves that roll for evermore.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Insensate and unceasing and untiring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They follow one another on; expiring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With sullen roar, amid the drifted sand:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While vast savannas, on the other hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stretch till they meet a heaven without a stain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unfathomed blue over unmeasured plain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Only a light-green tamarisk, here and there,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quivering in the faintest breath of air,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or a long belt of salicornes, appears,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With swans that dip them in the desert meres,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With oxen roaming the waste moor at large;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or swimming Vacares from marge to marge.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">At last the maiden murmured, but how weak<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The voice how vague the words! “On either cheek<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I seem to feel a breeze,—one from the sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One from the land: and this refreshes me<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like morning airs; but that doth sore oppress<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And burn me, and is full of bitterness.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So ceased. The people of Li Santo turn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Blankly from plain to ocean: then discern<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A lad who nears them, at so fleet a pace<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dust in clouds is raised; and, in the race<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Outstripped, the tamarisks are growing small,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And far behind the runner seem to fall.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Vincen it was. Ah, poor unhappy youth!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When Master Ambroi spake that sorry truth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“My son, the pretty little lotus-spray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is not for you!” he turned, and fled away;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From Valabrègo like a bandit fled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To see her once again. And when they said<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">In Crau, “She in Li Santo must be sought,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rhone, marshes, weary Crau, withheld him not;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor stayed he ever in his frantic search<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till, seeing that great throng inside the church,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He rose on tiptoe deadly pale, and crying,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Where is she?” And they answered, “She is dying<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Above there in the chapel.” In despair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all distraught, he hurried up the stair;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, when his eye fell on the prostrate one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Threw his hands wildly up. “What have I done,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What have I done against my God and hers<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To call down on me such a heavy curse<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“From Heaven? Have I cut the throat of her<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who gave me birth? or at a church taper<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lighted my pipe? or dared I, like the Jews,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The holy crucifix ’mong thistles bruise?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What is it, thou accursèd year of God,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Why must I bear so terrible a load?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Twas not enough my darling they denied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To me! They’ve hunted her to death!” he cried;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And then he knelt, and kissed her passionately;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the people, when they saw how greatly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His heart was wrung, felt theirs too swell with pain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wept aloud above the stricken twain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then, as the sound of many waters, falling<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Far down a rocky valley, rises calling<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the shepherd high the hills among,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rose from the church a sound of full-choired song,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the temple trembled with the swell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of that sweet psalm the Santen sing so well:—<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Saints of God, ere now sea-faring<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">On these briny plains of ours,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who have set a temple bearing<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Massy walls and snowy towers,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Watch the wave-tossed seaman kindly;<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Lend him aid the bark to guide;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Send him fair winds, lest he blindly<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Perish on the pathless tide!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“See the woman poor and sightless:<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Ne’er a word she uttereth;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dark her days are and delightless,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Darkness aye is worse than death.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Vain the spells they have told o’er her,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Blank is all her memory.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Queens of Paradise, restore her!<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Touch those eyes that they may see!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“We who are but fishers lowly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Lift our hearts ere forth we go;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ye, the helpful saints and holy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Fill our nets to overflow.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“So, when penitents heart-broken,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Sue for pardon at your door,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Flood their souls with peace unspoken,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">White flowers of our briny moor!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So prayed the Santen, with tears and strong crying.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then came the patrons to the maid low-lying,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And breathed a little life into her frame;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that her wan eyes brightened, and there came<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A tender flush of joy her visage over,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At the sweet sight of Vincen bent over her.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Why love, whence came you? Do you mind, I pray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A word you said down at the Farm one day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Walking under the trellis, by my side?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You said, ‘If ever any harm betide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hie thee right quickly to the holy Saints,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who cure all ills and hearken all complaints.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Dearest, I would you saw my heart this minute,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As in a glass, and all the comfort in it!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Comfort and peace like a full fountain welling<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Through all my happy spirit! There’s no telling—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A grace beyond my uttermost desires!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Look, Vincen: see you not God’s angel-choirs?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Pausing, she gazed into the deep blue air.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was as if she could discern up there<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wonderful things hidden from mortal men.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But soon her dreamy speech began again:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ah, they are happy, happy souls that soar<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Aloft, tethered by flesh to earth no more!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Did you mark, Vincen dear, the flakes of light<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That fell when they began their heavenward flight?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If all their words to me had written been,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They would have made a precious book, I ween.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here Vincen, who had striven his tears to stay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brake forth in sobs, and gave his anguish way.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Would to God I <i>had</i> seen them ere they went!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, would to God! Then to their white raiment,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like a tick fastening, I would have cried,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘O queens of heaven! Sole ark where we may bide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In this late hour, do what you will with me!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Maimed, sightless, toothless, I would gladly be;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>But leave my pretty little fairy sane<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sound!’<span class="lftspc">”</span> Here brake Mirèio in again:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“There are they, in their linen robes of grace!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They come!” and from her mother’s fond embrace<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Began to struggle wildly to be free,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And waved her hand afar toward the sea.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then all the folk turned also to the main,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And under shading hands their eyes ’gan strain;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet, save the pallid limit of the brine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blending and the separating line<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twixt wave and vault, they nothing could descry.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Naught cometh,” said they. But the child, “Oh, ay!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Look closer! There’s a bark, without a sail,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wafted toward us by a gentle gale,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And they are on it! And the swell subsides<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before them, and the bark so softly glides!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clear is the air and all the sea like glass,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the sea-birds do homage as they pass!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Poor child! she wanders,” murmured they; “for we<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">See only the red sunset on the sea!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Yet it is they! Mine eyes have told me true,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sick one panted?—“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Tis the boat in view!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now low, now lifted, it is drawing near,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, miracle of God!—the boat is here!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Now was she paling, as a marguerite<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Half-blown and smitten by a tropic heat,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While crouching Vincen, horror in his heart,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or ere his well-belovèd quite depart<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hath her in charge unto our Lady given,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the Saints of the chapel and of heaven.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Lit are the tapers, and, in violet stole<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Begirt, the priest, to stay the passing soul,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lays angel’s bread to those dry lips of hers,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the last unction so administers;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then of her body the seven parts anoints<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With holy oil, as holy church appoints.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The hour was calm. Upon the tiles no word<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Save the <i>oremus</i> of the priest was heard.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The last red shaft of the declining day<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Struck on the wall and passed, and heaven turned gray.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sea’s long waves came slowly up the shore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brake with a murmur soft, and were no more.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Beside the maid knelt father, mother, lover,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hoarsely sobbed at intervals above her;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till once again her lips moved, and she spake;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Now is the parting close at hand! So take<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My hand, and press it quickly, dears. Lo, now<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The glory grows on either Mary’s brow!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The pink flamingoes flock from the Rhone shore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tamarisks in blossom all adore.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dear Saints beckon me to them,” she said.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“They tell me I need never be afraid:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They know the constellations of the skies;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their bark will take us quick to Paradise!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“My little pet,” said Ramoun, quite undone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“You will not go, and leave the home so lone!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Why have I felled my oaks with such ado?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The zeal that nerved me only came of you.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If the hot sun on sultry glebe o’ertook me,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I thought of you, and heat and thirst forsook me.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Dear father, if a moth shall sometime fly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">About your lamp at night, that will be I.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But see! the Saints are standing on the prow!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They wait. I’m coming in a moment now!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Slowly I move, good Saints, for I am ailing.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“It is too much!” the mother brake out, wailing.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh, stay with me! I cannot let you die.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, when you’re well, Mirèio, by and by<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We’ll go some day to Aunt Aurano’s, dear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And carry pomegranates. Do you hear?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Maiano is not distant from our home;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, in one day, one may both go and come.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Not very distant, mother,—that I know;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But all alone thou wilt the journey go!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now give me my white raiment, mother mine.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, how the mantles of the Maries shine!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sawest thou ever such a dazzling sight?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The snow upon the hillsides is less white!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O thou,” cried the dark weaver, “who didst ope<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The palace of thy love to me, my hope,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My queen, my all! A blossoming alms thou gavest;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mire of my low life in thine thou lavest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till it shines like a mirror, and dost place<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Me in eternal honour by thy grace.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Pearl of Provence! of my young days the sun!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall it be ever said of such an one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I saw upon her forehead the death-dew?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall it be said, puissant Saints, of you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You looked unmoved upon her mortal pain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Letting her clasp your sacred sill in vain?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Slowly the maiden answered, “My poor friend,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What is it doth affright you, and offend?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Believe me, dear, the thing that we call death<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is a delusion. Lo! it vanisheth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As a fog when the bells begin their pealing;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As dreams with daylight through the window stealing.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I am not dying! See, I mount the boat<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With a light foot! And now we are afloat!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Good-by! good-by! We are drifting out to sea.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The waves encompass us, and needs must be<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The very avenue to Paradise,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For all around they touch the azure skies!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Gently they rock us now. And overhead<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So many stars are shining! Ah,” she said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Among those worlds one surely may be found<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where two may love in peace! Hark, Saints, that sound!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is it an organ played across the deep?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then sighed, and fell, as it had been, asleep.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, by her smiling lips, you might have guessed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That yet she spake. Only the Santen pressed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">About the sleeper in a mournful band,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, with a taper passed from hand to hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Signed the cross o’er her. While, as turned to stone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The parents gazed on what themselves had done.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">To them her form is all enrayed with light.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vainly they feel her cold, they see her white:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The awful stroke they comprehend not now.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, soon as Vincen marked the level brow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The rigid arms, the sweet eyes wholly veiled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“See you not she is dead?” he loudly wailed.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Quite dead?” And therewith fiercely wrung his hands,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As he of old had wrung the osier-strands,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And threw his naked arms abroad. “My own!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He cried, “they will not weep for you alone:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With yours, the trunk of my life too they fell.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Dead’ was I saying? ’Tis impossible:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“A demon whispered me the word, no doubt!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell me, in God’s name, ye who stand about,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ye who have seen dead women ere to-day,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If, passing through the gates, they smile that way.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her look is well-nigh merry, do you see?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Why do they turn their heads away from me,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And weep? This means, I think, that all is o’er.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her pretty prattle I shall hear no more:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Still is the voice I loved!” All hearts were thrilled;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tears rushed like rain, and sobs would not be stilled.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One sound went up of weeping and lament,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till the waves on the beach returned the plaint.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So when in some great herd a heifer dies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">About the carcass where it starkly lies<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nine following eves the beasts take up their station,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And seem to mourn after their speechless fashion;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sea, the plain, the winds, thereover blowing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Echo nine days with melancholy lowing,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Poor Master Ambroi!” Vincen wandered on,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thou wilt weep heavy tears over thy son!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now, good Santen, one last wish is mine,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bury me with my love, below the brine;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Scoop in the oozy sand a crib for two:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tears for so great a mourning will not do.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And a stone wall about the basin set,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So the sea flow not in, and part us yet!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Santen, I trust you! Then, while they are beating<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their brows, and with remorse her name repeating,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There at the farm where her home used to be,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Far from the unrest of the upper sea,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Down in the peaceful blue we will abide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My oh so pretty, alway side by side;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And you shall tell me of your Maries over,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over, until with shells the great storms cover.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here the crazed weaver on the corse him threw,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And from the church arose the psalm anew.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="spc">. . . . .</p>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="iq">“So, when penitents heart-broken<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Sue for pardon at your door,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Flood their souls with peace unspoken,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">White flowers of our briny moor!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
