<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CANTO_V" name="CANTO_V"/>CANTO V.<br/>
			<br/>
			<i>The Battle.</i></h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Cool with the coming eve the wind was blowing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The shadows of the poplars longer growing;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet still the westering sun was two hours high,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As the tired ploughman noted wistfully,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Two hours of toil ere the fresh twilight come,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wifely greeting by the door at home.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But Ourrias the brander left the spring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The insult he had suffered pondering.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So moved to wrath was he, so stung with shame,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blood into his very forehead came;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, muttering deadly spite beneath his teeth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He drave at headlong gallop o’er the heath.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">As damsons in a bush, the stones of Crau<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are plentiful; and Ourrias, fuming so,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Would gladly with the senseless flints have striven,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or through the sun itself his lance have driven.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A wild boar from its lair forced to decamp,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And scour the desert slopes of black Oulympe.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Ere turning on the dogs upon his track,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Erects the rugged bristles of his back,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And whets his tusks upon the mountain oaks.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now young Vincen with his comely looks<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Must needs have chosen the herdsman’s very path,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And meets him squarely, boiling o’er with wrath.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Whereas the simple dreamer wandered smiling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His memory with a sweet tale beguiling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That he had heard a fond girl whispering<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beneath a mulberry-tree one morn in spring.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Straight is he as a cane from the Durance;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And love, peace, joy, beam from his countenance.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The soft air swells his loose, unbottoned shirt:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His firm, bare feet are by the stones unhurt,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And light as lizard slips he o’er the way.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh! many a time, when eve was cool and gray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the land in shadow lay concealed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He used to roam about the darkling field,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Where the chill airs had shut the tender clover;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or, like a butterfly, descend and hover<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Around the homestead of Mirèio;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or, hidden cleverly, his hiding show,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like a gold-crested or an ivy wren,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By a soft chirrup uttered now and then.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And she would know who called her, and would fly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swift, silent, to the mulberry-tree hard by,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With quickened pulses. Fair is the moonlight<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon narcissus-buds in summer night,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sweet the rustle of the zephyr borne<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In summer eve over the ripening corn,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Until the whole, in infinite undulation,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seems like a great heart palpitant with passion.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Also the chamois hath a joy most keen<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When through the Queiras, that most wild ravine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All day before the huntsman he hath flown,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And stands at length upon a peak, alone<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">With larches and with ice fields, looking forth.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But all these joys and charms are little worth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With the brief rapture of the hours compared—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, brief!—that Vincen and Mirèio shared,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, by the friendly shadows favourèd,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">(Speak low, my lips, for trees can hear, ’tis said,)<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Their hands would seek each other and would meet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And silence fall upon them, while their feet<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Played idly with the pebbles in their way.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until, not knowing better what to say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The tyro-lover laughingly would tell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of all the small mishaps that him befell;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Of nights he passed beneath the open heaven;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of bites the farmers’ dogs his legs had given,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And show his scars. And then the maid told o’er<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her tasks of that day and the day before;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And what her parents said; and how the goat<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With trellis-flowers had filled his greedy throat.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Once only—Vincen knew not what he did;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, stealthy as a wild-cat, he had slid<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Along the grasses of the barren moor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And prostrate lay his darling’s feet before.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then—soft, my lips, because the trees can hear—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He said, “Give me one kiss, Mirèio dear!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I cannot eat nor drink,” he made his moan,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For the great love I bear you! Yea, mine own,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your breath the life out of my blood has taken.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Go not, Mirèio! Leave me not forsaken!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From dawn to dawn, at least, let a true lover<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Kneel, and your garment’s hem with kisses cover!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Why, Vincen,” said Mirèio, “that were sin!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then would the black-cap and the penduline<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell everywhere the secret they had heard!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“No fear of that! for every tell-tale bird<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’d banish from La Crau to Arles,” said he;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For you, Mirèio, are as heaven to me!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now list! There grows a plant in river Rhone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Eel-grass, the name whereby that plant is known,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Two flowers it beareth, each on its own stem,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a great space of water severs them,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the plant springs out of the river’s bed;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But when the time for wooing comes,” he said,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“One flower leaps to the surface of the flood,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in the genial sunshine opes its bud.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereon the other, seeing this so fair,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swims eagerly to seize and kiss her there;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, for the tangled weeds, can she not gain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her love, till her frail stem breaks with the strain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now free at last, but dying, she doth raise<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her pale lips for her sister’s last embrace.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So I! One kiss, and I will die to-night!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We are all alone!” Mirèio’s cheek grew white.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then sprang he, wild-eyed as a lissome beast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And clasped her. Hurriedly the maid released<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Herself from his too daring touch. Once more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He strove to seize,—but ah! my lips, speak lower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the trees hear,—“Give over!” cried the girl,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all her slender frame did writhe and curl.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet would he frantic cling; but straight thereafter<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She pinched him, bent, slipped, and, with ringing laughter,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The saucy little damsel sped away,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lifted up her voice in mocking lay.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So did these two, upon the twilight wold<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their moon-wheat sow, after the proverb old.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Flowery the moments were, and fleet with pleasure:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of such our Lord giveth abundant measure<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">To peasants and to kings alike. And so<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I come to what befell that eve on Crau.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ourrias and Vincen met. As lightning cleaves<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The first tall tree, Ourrias his wrath relieves.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Tis you son of a hag, for aught I know,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who have bewitched her,—this Mirèio;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And since your path would seem to lie her way,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tell her, tatterdemalion, what I say!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No more for her nor for her weasel face<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Care I than for the ancient clout,” he says,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“That from your shoulders fluttering I see.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Go, pretty coxcomb, tell her this from me!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Stopped Vincen thunderstruck. His wrath leaped high<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As leaps a fiery rocket to the sky.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Is it your pleasure that I strangle you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Base churl,” he said, “or double you in two?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And faced him with a look he well might dread,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As when a starving leopard turns her head.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">His face was purple, quivered all his frame.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Oh, better try!” the mocking answer came.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“You’ll roll headfirst upon the gravel, neighbour!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bah, puny hands! meet for no better labour<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Than to twist osiers when they’re supple made;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or to rob hen-roosts, lurking in the shade!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Stung by the insult, “Yea, I can twist osier,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And I can twist your neck with all composure,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Said Vincen. “Coward, it were well you ran!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Else vow I by St. James the Gallican,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You’ll never see your tamarisks any more!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">This iron first shall bray your limbs before!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Wondering, and charmed to find by such quick chance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A man whereon to wreak his vengeance,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Wait!” said the herdsman: “be not over-hot!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">First let me have a pipe, young idiot!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And brought to light a buckskin pouch, and set<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Between his teeth a broken calumet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then scornfully, “While rocking you, my lamb,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under the goose-foot, did your gypsy-dam<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ne’er tell the tale of Jan de l’Ours, I pray?—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Two men in one, who, having gone one day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By orders, to plough stubble with two yoke,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seized plough and teams, as shepherds do a crook,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And hurled them o’er a poplar-tree hard by?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Well for you, urchin, there’s no poplar nigh!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You couldn’t lead a stray ass whence it came!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But Vincen stood like pointer to the game.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I say,” he roared in tones stentorian,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Will you come down, or must I fetch you, man<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Or hog? Come! Brag no more your beast astride<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You flinch now we are going to decide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which sucked the better milk, or you or I?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was it you, bearded scoundrel? We will try!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Why, I will tread you like a sheaf of wheat,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If you dare flout yon maiden true and sweet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“No fairer flower in this land blossomed ever;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And I who am called Vincen, basket-weaver,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yes, I—her suitor, be it understood—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will wash your slanders out in your own blood,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If such you have!” Quoth Qurrias, “I am ready,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My gypsy-suitor to a cupboard! Steady!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Therewith alights. They fling their coats away,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fists fly, and pebbles roll before the fray.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They fall upon each other in the manner<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of two young bulls who, in the vast savannah,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where the great sun glares in the tropic sky,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sleek sides of a dark young heifer spy<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">In the tall grasses, lowing amorous.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The thunder bursts within them, challenged thus.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mad, blind with love, they paw, they stare, they spring;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And furious charge, their muzzles lowering;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Retire, and charge again. The ominous sound<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of crashing horns fills all the spaces round.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And long, I ween, the battle is, and dire.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The combatants are maddened by desire.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Puissant Love urges and goads them on.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So here, with either doughty champion.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twas Ourrias who received the first hard touch;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, being threatened with another such,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Lifts his huge fist and lays young Vincen flat<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As with a club. “There, urchin, parry that!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“See if I have a scratch, man!” cried the lad.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The other, “Bastard, count the knocks you’ve had!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Count you the ounces of hot blood,” he shouted,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Monster, that from your flattened nose have spouted!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And then they grapple; bend and stretch their best,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With foot to foot, shoulder to shoulder, prest.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their arms are wreathed and coiled like serpents fell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The veins within their necks to bursting swell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And tense their muscles with the mighty strain.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Long time they stiff and motionless remain,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">With pulsing flanks, like flap of bustard’s wing.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, one against the other steadying,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bear up like the abutments huge and wide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of that great bridge the Gardoun doth bestride.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Anon they part: their doubled fists upraise,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Once more the pestle in the mortar brays,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And in their fury ply they tooth or nail.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Good God! the blows of Vincen fall like hail.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet ah! what club-like hits the herdsman deals!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, as their crushing weight the weaver feels,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He whirls as whirls a sling about his foe,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And backward bends to deal his fiercest blow.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Look your last, villain!” Ere the word said he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mighty herdsman seized him bodily,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And flung him o’er his shoulder far away,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As a Provençal shovels wheat. He lay<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A moment on his side, not sorely hurt.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Pick up, O worm!” cried Ourrias,—“pick the dirt<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“You have displaced, and eat it, if you will!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Enough of that! Brute who was broken ill,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We’ll have three rounds before this game is over!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With bitter hate retorts the poor boy-lover;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, reddening to his very hair for shame,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rears like a dragon to retrieve his fame.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, daring death, he on the brute hath flown,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dealt a blow marvellous in such an one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Straight from the shoulder to the other’s breast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who reeled and groped for that whereon to rest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With darkening eyes and brow cold-beaded, till<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He crashed to earth, and all La Crau was still.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Its misty limit blent with the far sea;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sea’s with the blue ether, dreamily.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Still in mid-air there floated shining things,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swans, and flamingoes on their rosy wings,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Come to salute the last of the sunset<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Along the desert meres that glimmered yet.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The white mare of the herdsman lazily<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pulled at the dwarf-oak leaves that grew thereby:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The iron stirrups of the creature jangled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As loose and heavy at her sides they dangled.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Stir, and I crush you, ruffian!” Vincen said:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Tis not by feet that men are measurèd!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then in the silent wold the victor pressed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His heel upon the brander’s prostrate breast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who writhed beneath it vainly, while the blood<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sluggish and dark from lips and nostrils flowed.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thrice did he strive the horny foot to move,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And thrice the basket-weaver from above<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Dealt him a blow that levelled him once more,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until he haggard lay, and gasping sore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like some sea-monster. “So your mother, then,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was not, it seems, the only mould of men,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Said Vincen, jeeringly. “Go tell the tale<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of my fist’s weight to bulls in Sylvarèal.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Go to the waste of the Camargan isle,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And hide your bruises and your shame awhile<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Among your beasts!” So saying, he loosed his hold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As some great ram, a shearer in the fold<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pins with his knees till shorn; then, with a blow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the crupper, bids him freely go.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Bursting with rage and all defiled with dust,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The herdsman went his ways. But wherefore must<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He linger ferreting about the heath,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Amid the oaks and broom, under his breath<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Muttering curses? until suddenly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He stoops, then swings his savage trident high,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And darts on Vincen. For him all is done.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vain were the hope that murderous lance to shun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the boy paled as on the day he died;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Not fearing death, but that he could not bide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The treachery. A felon’s prey to be!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That stung the manly soul to agony.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Traitor, you dare not!” But the lad restrains<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The word, firm as a martyr in his pains;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For yon’s the farmstead hidden by the trees.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tenderly, wistfully, he turns to these.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“O my Mirèio!” said the eager eye,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Look hither, darling,—’tis for you I die!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Great heart, intent as ever on his love!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Say your prayers!” thundered Ourrias from above<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In a hoarse voice, and pitiless to hear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And pierced the victim with his iron spear.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, with a heavy groan, the fated lover<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the green-sward rolled, and all was over.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The beaten grass is dark with human gore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the field-ants already coursing o’er<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The prostrate limbs ere Ourrias mounts, and hies<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under the rising moon in frantic wise;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Muttering, as the flints beneath him fly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“To-night the Crau wolves will feast merrily.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Deep stillness reigned in Crau. Its limit dim<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Blent with the sea’s on the horizon’s rim,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sea’s with the blue ether. Gleaming things,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swans, and flamingoes on their ruddy wings,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Came to salute the last declining light<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Among the desert meres that glimmered white.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Away, Ourrias, away! Draw not the rein,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Urge thy unresting gallop o’er the plain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While the green heron shout their fearsome cries<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In thy mare’s ear, as the good creature flies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till her ear trembles, and her nostrils quiver,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And eyes dilate. That night the great Rhone River<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Slept on his stony bed beneath the moon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As pilgrim of Sainte Baume may lay him down,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fevered and weary, in a deep ravine.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ho!” cries the ruffian to three boatmen seen,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ho! Boat ahoy! We must cross, hark ye there!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On board or in the hold, I and my mare!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“On board, my hearty, then, without delay!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There shines the night-lamp! And lured by its ray,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Answered a cheery voice, “about our prow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And oars the fish frisk playfully enow.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It is good fishing, and the hour is fair.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On board at once! We have no time to spare.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Therewith upon the poop the villain clomb.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While, tethered to the stern, amid the foam<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Swam the white mare. Now fishes huge and scaly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forsook their grottoes, and leaped upward gayly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And flashed on the smooth surface of the stream.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Have a care, pilot! For this craft I deem<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Nowise too sound.” And he who spake once more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lay foot to stretcher, bent the supple oar.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“So I perceive. Ah!” was the pilot’s word,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I tell thee we’ve an evil freight on board.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No more. And all the while the vessel old<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Staggered and pitched and like a drunkard rolled.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A crazy craft! Rotten its timbers all.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thunder of God!” Ourrias began to call,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seizing the helm his tottering feet to stay.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereon the boat in some mysterious way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seemed moved to writhing, as a wounded snake<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose back a shepherd with a stone doth break.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Doth all this tumult, comrades, bode disaster?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Appealed the brander, growing pale as plaster.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“And will you drown me?” Brake the pilot out,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I cannot hold the craft! She springs about<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wriggles like a carp. Villain, I know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You’ve murdered some one, and not long ago!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Who told you that? May Satan if I have<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thrust me with his pitch-fork beneath the wave.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ah!” said the livid pilot, “then I err!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I had forgot the cause of all this stir.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Tis Saint Medard’s to-night, when poor drowned men<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Come from their dismal pits to land again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“How deep and dark soe’er their watery prison.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Look! Even now hath from the wave arisen<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The long procession of the weeping dead!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Barefoot, poor things! the shingly shore they tread,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The turbid water dripping, dripping, see,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From matted hair and stained clothes heavily.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“See them defile under the poplars tall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Carrying lighted tapers, one and all.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While up the river’s bank, now and anon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Eagerly clambereth another one.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Tis they who toss our wretched craft about<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So like a raging storm, I make no doubt.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Their cramped legs and their mottled arms—ah, see!—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And heavy heads they from the weeds would free.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oh, how they watch the stars as on they go,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quaff the fresh air and thrill at sight of Crau,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And scent the harvest odours the winds bring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In their brief hour of motion revelling!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And still the water from their garments raineth,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And still another and another gaineth<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The river-bank. And there,” the boatman moans,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Are the old men, women, and little ones:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They spurn the clinging mud. Ah me!” he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Yon ghastly things abhor the fisher’s trade.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The lamprey and the perch they made their game,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now are they become food for the same.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But what is this? Another piteous band,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Travelling in a line along the sand?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, yes! the poor deserted maids,” quoth he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Who asked the Rhone for hospitality,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And sought to hide their shame in the great river.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alas! alas! They seem to moan for ever.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, oh, how painfully, fond hearts, ill fated,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Labour the bosoms by the dank weeds weighted!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is it the water dripping that one hears<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From their long veils of hair, or is it tears?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">He ceased. The wending souls bare each a light,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Intently following in the silent night<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The river-shore. And those two listening<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Might even have heard the whirr of a moth’s wing.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Are they not, pilot,” asked the awe-struck brander,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Seeking somewhat in the gloom where they wander?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ah, yes, poor things!” the master-boatman said.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“See how from side to side is turned each head.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Tis their good works they seek,—their acts of faith<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sown upon earth ere their untimely death.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And when they spy the same, ’tis said moreover,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They haste thereto, as haste the sheep to clover,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The good work or the act of faith to cull.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And when of such as these their hands are full,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lo, they all turn to flowers! And they who gather<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Go tender them with joy to God the Father,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Being by the flowers to Peter’s gate conveyed.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thus those who find a watery grave,” he said,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The gracious God granteth a respite to,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That they may save themselves. But some anew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ere the day dawn will bury their good deeds<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Deep underneath the surging river-weeds.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And some,” the pilot whispered,—“some are worse,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Devourers of the needy, <i>murderers</i>,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Atheists, traitors, that worm-eaten kind.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These hunt the river-shore, but only find<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their sins and crimes like great stones in the gravel<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereon their bare feet stumble as they travel.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mule when dead is beaten never more;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But these God’s mercy shall in vain implore<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Under the roaring wave.” Here, sore afraid,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ourrias a hand upon the pilot laid,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like robber at a turning. “Look!” he cries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“There’s water in the hold!” Whereon replies<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pilot, coolly, “And the bucket’s there!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The herdsman bales for life in his despair.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Ay, bale, brave Ourrias! But there danced that night,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On Trincataio bridge, the water-sprite.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Madly the white mare strove to break her halter.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“What ails you, Blanco?” Ourrias ’gan falter.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Fear you the dead yonder upon the verge?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the gunnel plashed the rising surge.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Captain, the craft sinks, and I cannot swim!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I know no help,” the pilot answered him.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“We must go down. But, presently,” he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“A cable will be heaved us by the dead,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dead you fear so,—on the river-bank.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And even as he spake the vessel sank.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The tapers gleaming far and fitfully<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the poor ghostly hands flared forth so high,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They sent a shaft of vivid brilliance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Across the murky river’s broad expanse;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, as a spider in the morn you see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Glide o’er his late-spun thread, the boatmen three,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Being all spirits, leaped out of the stream,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And caught and swooped along the dazzling beam.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Ourrias, too, the cable sought to seize<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Amid the gurgling waters, even as these;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But sought it vainly. And the water-sprite<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Danced upon Trincataio bridge that night.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
