<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2><a name="CANTO_II" id="CANTO_II"></a>CANTO II.<br /><br />
<i>The Leaf-picking.</i></h2>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sing, magnarello, merrily,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the green leaves you gather!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In their third sleep the silk-worms lie,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And lovely is the weather<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like brown bees that in open glades<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From rosemary gather honey,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mulberry-trees swarm full of maids,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glad as the air is sunny!<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">It chanced one morn—it was May’s loveliest—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mirèio gathered leaves among the rest.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">It chanced, moreover, on that same May morning,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The little gypsy, for her own adorning,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had cherries in her ears, for rings, suspended,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Just as our Vincen’s footsteps thither tended.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Like Latin seaside people everywhere,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He wore a red cap on his raven hair,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">With a cock’s feather gayly set therein;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, prancing onward, with a stick made spin<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The flints from wayside stone-heaps, and set flying<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The lazy adders in his pathway lying.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">When suddenly, from the straight, leafy alley,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Whither so fast?” a voice comes musically.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mirèio’s. Vincen darts beneath the trees,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Looks up, and soon the merry maiden sees.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perched on a mulberry-tree, she eyed the lad<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like some gray-crested lark, and he was glad.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“How then, Mirèio, comes the picking on?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Little by little, all will soon be done!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">May I not help thee?”—“That were very meet,”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She said, and laughed upon her airy seat.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sprang Vincen like a squirrel from the clover,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ran nimbly up the tree, and said, moreover—<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Now since old Master Ramoun hath but thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Come down, I pray, and strip the lower tree!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I’ll to the top!” As busily the maiden<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wrought on, she murmured, “How the soul doth gladden<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To have good company! There’s little joy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In lonely work!”—“Ay is there!” said the boy:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“For when in our old hut we sit alone,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Father and I, and only hear the Rhone<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Rush headlong o’er the shingle, ’tis most drear!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Not in the pleasant season of the year,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For then upon our travels we are bound,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And trudge from farm to farm the country round.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“But when the holly-berries have turned red,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And winter comes, and nights are long,” he said,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“And sitting by the dying fire we catch<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whistle or mew of goblin at the latch;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I must wait till bed-time there with him,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Speaking but seldom, and the room so dim,”—<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Broke in the happy girl, unthinkingly,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Ah! but your mother, Vincen, where is she?”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Mother is dead.” The two were still awhile:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Then he, “But Vinceneto could beguile<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The time when she was there. A little thing,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But she could keep the hut.”—“I’m wondering—<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“You have a sister, Vincen?”—“That have I!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A merry lass and good,” was the reply:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“For down at Font-dou-Rèi, in Beaucaire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whither she went to glean, she was so fair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And deft at work that all were smitten by her;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And there she stays as servant by desire.”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“And you are like her?”—“Now that makes me merry.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why, she is blonde, and I brown as a berry!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But wouldst thou know whom she is like, the elf?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why, even like thee, Mirèio, thine own self!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Your two bright heads, with all their wealth of hair<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like myrtle-leaves, would make a perfect pair.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“But, ah! thou knowest better far to gather<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The muslin of thy cap than doth the other!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My little sister is not plain nor dull,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou,—thou art so much more beautiful!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Oh, what a Vincen!” cried Mirèio,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And suddenly the half-culled branch let go.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sing, magnarello, merrily,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the green leaves you gather!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In their third sleep the silk-worms lie,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And lovely is the weather.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Like brown bees that in open glades<br /></span>
<span class="i2">From rosemary gather honey,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The mulberry-trees swarm full of maids,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Glad as the air is sunny!<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“And so you fancy I am fair to view,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fairer than Vinceneto?” “That I do!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“But what advantage have I more than she?”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Mother divine!” he cried, impetuously,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“That of the goldfinch o’er the fragile wren—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Grace for the eye—song for the hearts of men<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“What more? Ah, my poor sister! Hear me speak,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou wilt not get the white out of the leek:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her eyes are like the water of the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blue, clear—thine, black, and they flash gloriously.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, O Mirèio! when on me they shine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I seem to drain a bumper of cooked wine!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“My sister hath a silver voice and mellow,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I love to hear her sing the <i>Peirounello</i>,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But, ah! my sweet young lady, every word<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thou’st given me my spirit more hath stirred,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My ear more thrilled, my very heart-strings wrung,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">More than a thousand songs divinely sung!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“With roaming all the pastures in the sun,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My little sister’s face and neck are dun<br /></span>
<span class="i0">As dates; but thou, most fair one, I think well,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Art fashioned like the flowers of Asphodel.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So the bold Summer with his tawny hand<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Dare not caress thy forehead white and bland.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Moreover, Vinceneto is more slim<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than dragon-flies that o’er the brooklet skim.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Poor child! In one year grew she up to this;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But verily in thy shape is naught amiss.”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Again Mirèio, turning rosy red,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Let fall her branch, and “What a Vincen!” said.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sing, magnarello, merrily,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The green leaves ever piling!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Two comely children sit on high,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Amid the foliage, smiling.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sing, magnarello, loud and oft:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Your merry labour hasten.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The guileless pair who laugh aloft<br /></span>
<span class="i2">Are learning love’s first lesson.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Cleared from the hills meanwhile the mists of morn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And o’er the ruined towers, whither return<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nightly the grim old lords of Baux, they say;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And o’er the barren rocks ’gan take their way<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vultures, whose large, white wings are seen to gleam<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Resplendent in the noontide’s burning beam.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then cried the maiden, pouting, “We have done<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Naught! Oh, shame to idle so! <i>Some one</i><br /></span>
<span class="i0">Said he would help me; and that some one still<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Doth naught but talk, and make me laugh at will.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Work now, lest mother say I am unwary<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And idle, and too awkward yet to marry!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Ah! my brave friend, I think should one engage you<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To pick leaves by the quintal, and for wage, you<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Would all the same sit still and feast your eyes,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Handling the ready sprays in dreamy wise!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whereat the boy, a trifle disconcerted,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“And so thou takest me for a gawky!” blurted.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“We’ll see, my fair young lady,” added he,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Which of us two the better picker be!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They ply both hands now. With vast animation,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They bend and strip the branches. No occasion<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For rest or idle chatter either uses<br /></span>
<span class="i0">(The bleating sheep, they say, her mouthful loses),<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Until the mulberry-tree is bare of leaves,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And these the ready sack at once receives,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">At whose distended mouth—ah, youth is sweet!—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mirèio’s pretty taper hand will meet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In strange entanglement that somehow lingers<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That Vincen’s, with its brown and burning fingers.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Both started. In their cheeks the flush rose higher:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They felt the heat of some mysterious fire.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They dropped the mulberry-leaves as if afraid,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, tremulous with passion, the boy said,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“What aileth thee, my lady? answer me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Did any hidden hornet dare sting thee?”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Well-nigh inaudible, with head bent low,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“I know not, Vincen,”—thus Mirèio.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And so they turned a few more leaves to gather,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And for a while spake not again, but rather<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Exchanged bright looks and sidelong, saying well<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The one who first should laugh, would break the spell.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Their hearts beat high, the green leaves fell like rain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, when the time for sacking came again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Whether by chance or by contrivance, yet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The white hand and the brown hand always met.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Nor seemed there any lack of happiness<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The while their labour failed not to progress.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sing, magnarello, merrily,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">As the green leaves you gather!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The sun of May is riding high,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">And ardent is the weather.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Now suddenly Mirèio whispered, “Hark!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What can that be?” and listened like a lark<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon a vine, her small forefinger pressing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Against her lip, and eager eyes addressing<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To a bird’s nest upon a leafy bough,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Just opposite the one where she was now.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Ah! wait a little while!” with bated breath,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So the young basket-weaver answereth,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And like a sparrow hopped from limb to limb<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Toward the nest. Down in the tree-trunk dim,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Close peering through a crevice in the wood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Full-fledged and lively saw he the young brood.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And, sitting firmly the rough bough astride,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Clung with one hand, and let the other glide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into the hollow trunk. Above his head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mirèio leaned with her cheeks rosy red.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“What sort?” she whispered from her covert shady.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Beauties!”—“But what?”—“Blue tomtits, my young lady!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Then laughed the maiden, and her laugh was gay:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“See, Vincen! Have you never heard them say<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That when two find a nest in company,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">On mulberry, or any other tree,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The Church within a year will join those two?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And proverbs, father says, are always true.”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Yea,” quoth the lad; “but do not thou forget<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That this, our happy hope, may perish yet,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">If all the birdies be not caged forthwith.”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Jesu divine!” the maiden murmureth:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Put them by quickly! It concerns us much<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Our birdies should be safe from alien touch.”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Why, then, the very safest place,” said he,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Methinks, Mirèio, would thy bodice be!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Oh, surely!” So the lad explores the hollow,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">His hand withdrawing full of tomtits callow.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Four were they; and the maid in ecstacy<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Cries “Mon Dieu!” and lifts her hands on high.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“How many! What a pretty brood it is!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There! There, poor darlings, give me just one kiss!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, lavishing a thousand fond caresses,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tenderly, carefully, the four she presses<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Inside her waist, obeying Vincen’s will;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While he, “Hold out thy hands! there are more still!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Oh sweet! The little eyes in each blue head<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Are sharp as needles,” as Mirèio said<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Softly, three more of the wee brood she pressed<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Into their smooth, white prison with the rest,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Who, when bestowed within that refuge warm,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thought they were in their nest and safe from harm.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Are there more, Vincen?”—“Ay!” he answered her.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Then, Holy Virgin! you’re a sorcerer!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Thou simple maid! About St. George’s day,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ten, twelve, and fourteen eggs, these tomtits lay.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ay, often. Now let these the others follow!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They are the last: so good-bye, pretty hollow!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">But ere the words were spoken, and the maid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">In her flowered neckerchief had fairly laid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Her little charge, she gave a piercing wail:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Oh me! oh me!” then murmured, and turned pale;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, laying both her hands upon her breast,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moaned, “I am dying!” and was sore distressed,<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And could but weep: “Ah, they are scratching me!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">They sting! Come quickly, Vincent, up the tree!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For on the last arrival had ensued<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Wondrous commotion in the hidden brood;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The fledglings latest taken from the nest<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had sore disorder wrought among the rest.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Because within so very small a valley<br /></span>
<span class="i0">All could not lie at ease, so must they gayly<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Scramble with claw and wing down either slope,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And up the gentle hills, thus to find scope:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thousand tiny somersets they turn,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A thousand pretty rolls they seem to learn.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And “Ah, come quick!” is still the maiden’s cry,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trembling like vine-spray when the wind is high,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or like a heifer stung with cattle-flies.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And, as she bends and writhes in piteous wise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Leaps Vincen upward till he plants his feet<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once more beside her on her airy seat.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Sing, magnarello, heap your leaves,<br /></span>
<span class="i2">While sunny is the weather!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">He comes to aid her when she grieves:<br /></span>
<span class="i2">The two are now together.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>

<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Thou likest not this tickling?” kindly said he.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“What if thou wert like me, my gentle lady,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And hadst to wander barefoot through the nettles?”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So proffering his red sea-cap, there he settles<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fast as she draws them from her neckerchief<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The birdies, to Mirèio’s vast relief.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Yet ah, poor dear, the downcast eyes of her!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">She dares not look at her deliverer<br /></span>
<span class="i0">For a brief space. But soon a smile ensues,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the tears vanish, as the morning dews<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That drench the flowers and grass at break of day<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Roll into little pearls and pass away.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">And then there came a fresh catastrophe:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The branch whereon they sat ensconced in glee<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Snapped, broke asunder, and with ringing shriek<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Mirèio flung her arms round Vincen’s neck,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And he clasped hers, and they whirled suddenly<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Down through the leaves upon the supple rye.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Listen, wind of the Greek, wind of the sea,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And shake no more the verdant canopy!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hush for one moment, O thou childish breeze!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Breathe soft and whisper low, beholding these!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Give them a little time to dream of bliss,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To dream at least, in such a world as this!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Thou too, swift streamlet of the prattling voice,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Peace, prithee! In this hour, make little noise<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Among the vocal pebbles of thy bed!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Ay, little noise! Because two souls have sped<br /></span>
<span class="i0">To one bright region. Leave them there, to roam<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the starry heights,—their proper home!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">A moment, and she struggled to be free<br /></span>
<span class="i0">From his embrace. The flower of the quince-tree<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Is not so pale. Then backward the two sank,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And gazed at one another on the bank,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Until the weaver’s son the silence brake,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thus in seeming wrath arose and spake:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Shame on thee, thou perfidious mulberry!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A devil’s tree! A Friday-planted tree!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blight seize and wood-louse eat thee! May thy master<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Hold thee in horror for this day’s disaster!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Tell me thou art not hurt, Mirèio!”<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Trembling from head to foot, she answered, “No:<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“I am not hurt; but as a baby weeps<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And knows not why,—there’s something here that keeps<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Perpetual tumult in my heart. A pain<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Blinds me and deafens me, and fills my brain,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So that my blood in a tumultuous riot<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Courses my body through, and won’t be quiet.”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“May it not be,” the simple boy replied,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Thou fearest to have thy mother come and chide<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy tardy picking,—as when I come back<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Late from the blackberry-field with face all black,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And tattered clothes?” Mirèio sighed again,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Ah, no! This is another kind of pain!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Or possibly a sun-stroke may have lighted<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon thee!” And the eager Vincen cited<br /></span>
<span class="i0">An ancient crone among the hills of Baux,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Taven by name, “who on the forehead,—so,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A glass of water sets: the ray malign<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The dazed brain for the crystal will resign.”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Nay, nay!” impetuously the maiden cried,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Floods of May sunshine never terrified<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The girls of Crau. Why should I hold you waiting?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vincen, in vain my heart is palpitating!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My secret cannot bide a home so small:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I love you, Vincen, love you!—That is all!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">The river-banks, the close-pruned willows hoary,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Green grass and ambient air, hearing this story,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Were full of glee. But the poor basket-weaver,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“Princess, that thou who art so fair and clever,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Shouldst have a tongue given to wicked lying!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why, it confounds me! It is stupefying!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“What! thou in love with me? Mirèio,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My poor life is yet happy. Do not go<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And make a jest thereof! I might believe<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Just for one moment, and thereafter grieve<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My soul to death. Ah, no! my pretty maid,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Laugh no more at me in this wise!” he said.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Now may God shut me out of Paradise,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vincen, if I have ever told you lies!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Go to! I love you! Will that kill you, friend?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But if you <i>will</i> be cruel, and so send<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Me from your side, ’tis I who will fall ill,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And at your feet lie low till sorrow kill!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“No more! no more!” cried Vincen, desperately:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“There is a gulf ’twixt thee and me! The stately<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Queen of the Lotus Farm art thou, and all<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Bow at thy coming, hasten to thy call,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">While I, a vagrant weaver, only wander,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Plying my trade from Valabrègo yonder.”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“What care I?” cried the fiery girl at once.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Sharp as a sheaf-binder’s came her response.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“May not my lover, then, a baron be,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or eke a weaver, if he pleases me?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But if you will not have me pine away,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Why look so handsome, even in rags, I say?”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">He turned and faced her. Ah, she was enchanting!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And as a charmèd bird falls dizzy, panting,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So he. “Mirèio, thou’rt a sorceress!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And I bedazzled by thy loveliness.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy voice, too, mounts into this head of mine,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And makes me like a man o’ercome with wine.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Why, can it be, Mirèio? Seest thou not<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even now with thy embrace my brain is hot.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I am a pack-bearer, and well may be<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A laughing-stock for evermore to thee,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But thou shalt have the truth, dear, in this hour:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I love thee, with a love that could devour!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“Wert thou to ask,—lo, love I thee so much!—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The golden goat, that ne’er felt mortal touch<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Upon its udders, but doth only lick<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Moss from the base of the precipitous peak<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Of Baux,—I’d perish in the quarries there,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Or bring thee down the goat with golden hair!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“So much, that, if thou saidst, ‘I want a star,’<br /></span>
<span class="i0">There is no stream so wild, no sea so far,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But I would cross; no headsman, steel or fire,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That could withhold me. Yea, I would climb higher<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Than peaks that kiss the sky, that star to wrest;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And Sunday thou shouldst wear it on thy breast!<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“O my Mirèio! Ever as I gaze,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Thy beauty fills me with a deep amaze.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Once, when by Vaucluse grotto I was going,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">I saw a fig-tree in the bare rock growing;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">So very spare it was, the lizards gray<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Had found more shade beneath a jasmine spray.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“But, round about the roots, once every year<br /></span>
<span class="i0">The neighbouring stream comes gushing, as I hear,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And the shrub drinks the water as it rises,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And that one drink for the whole year suffices.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Even as the gem is cut to fit the ring,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">This parable to us is answering.<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">“I am the fig-tree on the barren mountain;<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And thou, mine own, art the reviving fountain!<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Surely it would suffice me, could I feel<br /></span>
<span class="i0">That, once a year, I might before thee kneel,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And sun myself in thy sweet face, and lay<br /></span>
<span class="i0">My lips unto thy fingers, as to-day!”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Trembling with love, Mirèio hears him out,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And lets him wind his arms her neck about<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And clasp her as bewildered. Suddenly,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Through the green walk, quavers an old wife’s cry:<br /></span>
<span class="i0">“How now, Mirèio? Are you coming soon?<br /></span>
<span class="i0">What will the silk-worms have to eat at noon?”<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">As ofttimes, at the coming on of night,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A flock of sparrows on a pine alight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">And fill the air with joyous chirruping,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Yet, if a passing gleaner pause and fling<br /></span>
<span class="i0">A stone that way, they to the neighbouring wood,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">By terror winged, their instant flight make good;<br /></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">So, with a tumult of emotion thrilled,<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Fled the enamoured two across the field.<br /></span>
<span class="i0">But when, her leaves upon her head, the maid<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Turned silently toward the farm, he stayed,—<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Vincen,—and breathless watched her in her flight<br /></span>
<span class="i0">Over the fallow, till she passed from sight.<br /></span>
</div></div>
</div>



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
