<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="CANTO_IV" name="CANTO_IV"/>CANTO IV.<br/>
			<br/>
			<i>The Suitors.</i></h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i2">When violets are blue in the blue shadows<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Of the o’erhanging trees,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The youth who stray in pairs about the meadows<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">Are glad to gather these.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i2">When peace descends upon the troubled Ocean,<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">And he his wrath forgets,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Flock from Martigue the boats with wing-like motion,<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">The fishes fill their nets.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i2">And when the girls of Crau bloom into beauty<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">(And fairer earth knows not),<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Aye are there suitors ready for their duty<br/></span>
						<span class="i6">In castle and in cot.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Thus to Mirèio’s home came seeking her<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A trio notable,—a horse-tamer,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A herdsman, and a shepherd. It befell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The last was first who came his tale to tell.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alari was his name, a wealthy man—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He had a thousand sheep, the story ran.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The same were wont to feed the winter long<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In rich salt-pastures by Lake Entressen.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And at wheat-boiling time, in burning May,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Himself would often lead his flock, they say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Up through the hills to pastures green and high:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They say moreover, and full faith have I,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That ever as St. Mark’s came round again<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nine noted shearers Alari would retain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Three days to shear his flock. Added to these<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A man to bear away each heavy fleece,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And a sheep-boy who back and forward ran<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And filled the shearer’s quickly emptied can.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But when the summer heats began to fail<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the high peaks to feel the snowy gale,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A stately sight it was that flock to see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wind from the upper vales of Dauphiny,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And o’er the Crau pursue their devious ways,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the toothsome winter grass to graze.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Also to watch them there where they defile<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Into the stony road were well worth while;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The early lambkins all the rest outstripping<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And merrily about the lamb-herd leaping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bell-decked asses with their foals beside,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or following after them. These had for guide<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A drover, who a patient mule bestrode.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Its wattled panniers bare a motley load:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Food for the shepherd-folk, and flasks of wine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the still bleeding hides of slaughtered kine;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And folded garments whereon oft there lay<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Some weakly lamb, a-weary of the way.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Next came abreast—the captains of the host—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Five fiery bucks, their fearsome heads uptost:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With bells loud jingling and with sidelong glances,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And backward curving horns, each one advances.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sober mothers follow close behind,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Striving their lawless little kids to mind.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A rude troop and a ravenous they are,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And these the goat-herd hath in anxious care.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And after them there follow presently<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The great ram-chiefs, with muzzles lifted high:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You know them by the heavy horn that lies<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thrice curved about the ear in curious wise.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Their ribs and backs with tufts of wool are decked,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That they may have their meed of due respect<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As the flock’s grandsires. Plain to all beholders,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With sheepskin cloak folded about his shoulders,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Strides the chief-shepherd next, with lordly swing;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The main corps of his army following.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Tumbling through clouds of dust, the great ewe-dams<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Call with loud bleatings to their bleating lambs.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The little hornèd ones are gayly drest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With tiny tufts of scarlet on the breast<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And o’er the neck. While, filling the next place,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The woolly sheep advance at solemn pace.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Amid the tumult now and then the cries<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of shepherd-boy to shepherd-dog arise.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For now the pitch-marked herd innumerable<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Press forward: yearlings, two-year-olds as well,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Those who have lost their lambs, and those who bear<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Twin lambs unborn,—and wearily they fare.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A ragamuffin troop brings up the rear.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The barren and past-breeding ewes are here,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The lame, the toothless, and the remnant sorry<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of many a mighty ram, lean now and hoary,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who from his earthly labours long hath rested,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of honour and of horns alike divested.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">All these who fill the road and mountain-passes—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Old, young, good, bad, and neither; sheep, goats, asses—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are Alari’s, every one. He stands the while<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And watches them, a hundred in a file,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pass on before him; and the man’s eyes laugh.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His wand of office is a maple staff.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And when to pasture with his dogs hies he,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And leathern gaiters buttoned to the knee,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His forehead to an ample wisdom grown<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And air serene might be King David’s own,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When in his youth he led, as the tale tells,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The flocks at eve beside his father’s wells.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">This was the chief toward Lotus Farm who drew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And presently Mirèio’s self who knew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Flitting about the doorway. His heart bounded.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Good Heaven!” he cried, “her praises they have sounded<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nowise too loudly! Ne’er saw I such grace<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or high or low, in life or pictured face!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Only that face to see, his flock forsaking,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alari had come. Yet now his heart was quaking<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When, standing in the presence of the maid,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Would you so gracious be, fair one,” he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“As to point out the way these hills to cross?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For else find I myself at utter loss.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh, yes!” replied the girl, ingenuously,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thou takest the straight road, and comest thereby<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Into Pèiro-malo desert. Then<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Follow the winding path till thou attain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A portico with an old tomb anear:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Two statues of great generals it doth bear.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0"><i>Antiquities</i> they call them hereabout.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thanks, many!” said the youth. “I had come out<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A thousand of my woolly tribe, or so,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To lead into the mountains from La Crau.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We leave to-morrow. I their way direct,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sleeping-spots and feeding-ground select.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“They bear my mark, and are of fine breed, all;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And for my shepherdess, when one I call<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My own, the nightingales will ever sing.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dared I hope you’d take my offering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mirèio dear, no gems I’d tender you,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But a carved box-wood cup,—mine own work too!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Therewith he brought to light a goblet fair,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wrapped like some sacred relic with all care,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And carven of box-wood green. It was his pleasure<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Such things to fashion in his hours of leisure;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, sitting rapt upon some wayside stone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He wrought divinely with a knife alone.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">He carved him castanets with fingers light,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that his flock would follow him at night<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Through the dark fields, obedient to their tones.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And on the ringing collars, and the bones<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That served for bell-tongues, he would cut with skill<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Faces and figures, flowers and birds, at will.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">As for the goblet he was tendering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You would have said that no such fairy thing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was ever wrought by shepherd’s knife or wit:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A full-flowered poppy wreathed the rim of it;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in among the languid flowers there<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Two chamois browsed, and these the handles were.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A little lower down were maidens three,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And certes they were marvellous to see:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Near by, beneath a tree, a shepherd-lad<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Slept, while on tiptoe stole the maidens glad,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sought to seal his lips, ere he should waken,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With a grape-cluster from their basket taken.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Yet even now he smiles at their illusion,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So that the foremost maid is all confusion.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The odour of the goblet proved it new:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The giver had not drunk therefrom; and you<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had said, but for their woody colouring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The carven shapes were each a living thing.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Mirèio scanned the fair cup curiously.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“A tempting offering thine, shepherd!” said she:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But suddenly, “A finer one than this<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hath my heart’s lord! Shepherd, his love it is!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mine eyes close, his impassioned glances feeling:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I falter with the rapture o’er me stealing!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So saying, she vanished like a tricksy sprite;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Alari turned, and in the gray twilight<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ruefully, carefully, he folded up<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bore away again his carven cup,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Deeming it sad and strange this winsome elf<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her love should yield to any but himself.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Soon to the farm came suitor number two,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A keeper of wild horses from Sambu,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Veran, by name. About his island bower<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In the great prairies, where the asters flower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He used to keep a hundred milk-white steeds,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who nipped the heads of all the lofty reeds.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A hundred steeds! Their long manes flowing free<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As the foam-crested billows of the sea!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wavy and thick and all unshorn were they;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And when the horses on their headlong way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Plunged all together, their dishevelled hair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seemed the white robes of creatures of the air.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">I say it to the shame of human kind:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Camargan steeds were never known to mind<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The cruel spur more than the coaxing hand.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Only a few or so, I understand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By treachery seduced, have halter worn,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And from their own salt prairies been borne;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Yet the day comes when, with a vicious start,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their riders throwing, suddenly they part,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And twenty leagues of land unresting scour,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Snuffing the wind, till Vacarès once more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They find, the salt air breathe, and joy to be<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In freedom after ten years’ slavery.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">For these wild steeds are with the sea at home:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Have they not still the colour of the foam?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Perchance they brake from old King Neptune’s car;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For when the sea turns dark and moans afar,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the ships part their cables in the bay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The stallions of Camargue rejoicing neigh,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Their sweeping tails like whipcord snapping loudly;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or pawing the earth, all, fiercely and proudly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As though their flanks were stung as with a rod<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By the sharp trident of the angry god,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who makes the rain a deluge, and the ocean<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stirs to its depths in uttermost commotion.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And these were all Veran’s. Therefore one day<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The island-chieftain paused upon his way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Across La Crau beside Mirèio’s door;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For she was famed, and shall be evermore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For beauty, all about the delta wide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where the great Rhone meeteth the ocean tide.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Confident came Veran to tell his passion,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With paletot, in the Arlesian fashion,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Long, light, and backward from his shoulders flowing;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His gay-hued girdle like a lizard glowing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The while his head an oil-skin cap protected,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wherefrom the dazzling sun-rays were reflected.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And first the youth to Master Ramoun drew.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Good-morrow to you, and good fortune too!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He said. “I come from the Camargan Rhone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As keeper Pèire’s grandson I am known.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou mindest him! For twenty years or more<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My grandsire’s horses trod thy threshing-floor.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Three dozen had the old man venerable,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As thou, beyond a doubt, rememberest well.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But would I, Master Ramoun, it were given<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To thee to see the increase of that leaven!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let ply the sickles! We the rest will do,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For now have we an hundred lacking two!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And long, my son,” the old man said, “pray I<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That you may see them feed and multiply.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I knew your grandsire well for no brief time;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now on him and me the hoary rime<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of age descends, and by the home lamp’s ray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We sit content, and no more visits pay.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But, Master Ramoun,” cried the youthful lover,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“All that I want thou dost not yet discover!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For down at Sambu, in my island home,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When the Crau folk for loads of litter come,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And we help cord them down, it happens so<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We talk sometimes about the girls of Crau.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And thy Mirèio they have all portrayed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So charmingly, that, if thou wilt,” he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“And if thou like me, I would gladly be<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thy son-in-law!” “God grant me this to see!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Said Ramoun. “The brave scion of my friend<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To me and mine can only honour lend.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then did he fold his hands and them upraise<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In saint-like gratitude. “And yet,” he says,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The child must like you too, O Veranet!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The only one will alway be a pet!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Meanwhile, in earnest of the dower I’ll give her,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blessing of the saints be yours for ever!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Forthwith summoned Ramoun his little daughter,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And told her of the friend who thus had sought her.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pale, trembling, and afraid, “O father dear!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She said, “is not thy wisdom halting here?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For I am but a child: thou dost forget.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Surely thou wouldst not send me from thee yet!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Slowly, so thou hast often said to me,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Folk learn to love and live in harmony.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For one must know, and also must be known;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And even then, my father, all’s not done!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here the dark shadow on her brow was lit<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By some bright thought that e’en transfigured it.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So the drenched flowers, when morning rains are o’er,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lift up their heavy heads, and smile once more.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">
							<i>Mirèio’s mother held her daughter’s view.</i>
							<br/>
						</span>
						<span class="i0">Then blandly rose the keeper, “Adieu,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Master,” he said: “who in Camargue hath dwelt<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Knows the mosquito-sting as soon as felt.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Also that summer came to Lotus Place<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One from Petite Camargue, named Ourrias.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Breaker and brander of wild cattle, he;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And black and furious all the cattle be<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over those briny pastures wild who run,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Maddened by flood and fog and scalding sun.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Alone this Ourrias had them all in charge<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Summer and winter, where they roamed at large.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And so, among the cattle born and grown,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Their build, their cruel heart, became his own;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His the wild eye, dark colour, dogged look.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How often, throwing off his coat, he took<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">His cudgel,—savage weaner!—never blenching,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And first the young calves from the udders wrenching,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the wrathful mother fell so madly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That cudgel after cudgel brake he gladly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till she, by his brute fury masterèd,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wild-eyed and lowing to the pine-copse fled!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Oft in the branding at Camargue had he<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oxen and heifers, two-year-olds and three,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seized by the horns and stretched upon the ground.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His forehead bare the scar of an old wound<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fiery and forked like lightning. It was said<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That once the green plain with his blood was red.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">On a great branding-day befell this thing:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To aid the mighty herd in mustering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Li Santo, Agui Morto, Albaron,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Faraman a hundred horsemen strong<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had sent into the desert. And the herd<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Roused from its briny lairs, and, forward spurred<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">By tridents of the branders close behind,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fell on the land like a destroying wind.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Heifers and bulls in headlong gallop borne<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Plunged, crushing centaury and salicorne;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And at the branding-booth at last they mustered,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Just where a crowd three hundred strong had clustered.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A moment, as if scared, the beasts were still.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, when the cruel spur once more they feel,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They start afresh, into a run they break,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And thrice the circuit of the arena make;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As marterns fly a dog, or hawks afar<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By eagles in the Luberon hunted are.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then Ourrias—what ne’er was done before—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Leaped from his horse beside the circus-door<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Amid the crowd. The cattle start again,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All saving five young bulls, and scour the plain;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But these, with flaming eyes and horns defying<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Heaven itself, are through the arena flying.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And he pursues them. As a mighty wind<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Drives on the clouds, he goads them from behind,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And presently outstrips them in the race;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then thumps them with the cruel goad he sways,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dances before them as infuriate,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lets them feel his own fists’ heavy weight.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The people clap and shout, while Ourrias<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">White with Olympic dust encountered has<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">One bull, and seized him by the horns at length;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now ’tis head to muzzle, strength for strength.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The monster strans his prisoned horns to free<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until he bleeds, and bellows horribly.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But vain his fury, useless all his trouble!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The neatherd had the art to turn and double<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And force the huge head with his shoulder round,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And shove it roughly back, till on the ground<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Christian and beast together rolled, and made<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A formless heap like some huge barricade.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The tamarisks are shaken by the cry<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of “Bravo Ourrias! That’s done valiantly!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While five stout youths the bull pin to the sward;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Ourrias, his triumph to record,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seizes the red-hot iron with eager hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The vanquished monster on the hip to brand.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then came a troop of girls on milk-white ponies,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Arlesians,—flushed and panting every one is,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As o’er the arena at full gallop borne<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They offer him a noble drinking-horn<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Brimful of wine; then turn and disappear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Each followed by her faithful cavalier.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The hero heeds them not. His mind is set<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the four monsters to be branded yet:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mower toils the harder for the grass<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He sees unmown. And so this Ourrias<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fought the more savagely as his foes warmed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And conquered in the end,—but not unharmed.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">White-spotted and with horns magnificent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fourth beast grazed the green in all content.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Now, man, enough!” in vain the neatherds shouted;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Couched is the trident and the caution flouted;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With perspiration streaming, bosom bare,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ourrias the spotted bull charged then and there!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">He meets his enemy, a blow delivers<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Full in the face; but ah! the trident shivers.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The beast becomes a demon with the wound:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The brander grasps his horns, is whirled around,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They start together, and are borne amain,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Crushing the salicornes along the plain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The mounted herdsmen, on their long goads leaning,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Regard the mortal fray; for each is meaning<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dire vengeance now. The man the brute would crush,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The brute bears off the man with furious rush;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The while with heavy, frothy tongue he clears<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The blood that to his hanging lip adheres.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The brute prevailed. The man fell dazed, and lay<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like a vile rakeful in the monster’s way.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Sham dead!” went up a cry of agony.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vain words! The beast his victim lifted high<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On cruel horns and savage head inclined,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And flung him six and forty feet behind!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Once more a deafening outcry filled the place<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And shook the tamarisks. But Ourrias<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fell prone to earth, and ever after wore he<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The ugly scar that marred his brow so sorely.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now, mounted on his mare, he paces slow<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With goad erect to seek Mirèio.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">It chanced the little maid was all alone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She had, that morning, to the fountain gone;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And here, with sleeves and petticoats uprolled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And small feet dabbling in the water cold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She was her cheese-forms cleaning with shave-grass;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, lady saints! how beautiful she was!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Good-morrow, pretty maid!” began the wooer,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thy forms will shine like mirrors, to be sure!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will it offend thee, if I lead my mare<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To drink out of thy limpid streamlet there?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Pray give her all thou wilt, at the dam head:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We’ve water here to spare!” the maiden said.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Fair one!” spake the wild youth, “if e’er thou come<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As pilgrim or as bride to make thy home<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At Sylvarèal by the noisy wave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No life of toil like this down here thou’lt have!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Our fierce black cows are never milked, but these<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Roam all at large, and women sit at ease.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Young man, in cattle-land, I’ve heard them say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Maids die of languor.”—“Pretty maiden, nay:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There is no languor where two are together!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“But brows are blistered in that burning weather,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bitter waters drunk.”—“When the sun shines,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My lady, thou shalt sit beneath the pines!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ah! but they say, young man, those pines are laden<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With coils of emerald serpents.”—“Fairest maiden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We’ve herons also, and flamingoes red<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That chase them down the Rhone with wings outspread<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like rosy scarfs.”—“Then, I would have thee know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lotus and pine too far asunder grow!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But priests and maids, my beauty, ne’er can tell,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The saw affirms, the land where they may dwell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And eat their bread.”—“Let mine but eaten be<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With him I love: that were enough,” said she,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“To lure me from the home-nest to remove.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“If that be so, sweet one, give me thy love!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Thy suit,” Mirèio said, “mayhap I’ll grant!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But first, young man, yon water-lily plant<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will bear a cluster of columbine grapes.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yon hills will melt from all their solid shapes,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That goad will flower, and all the world will go<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In boats unto the citadel of Baux!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
