<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Cocooning</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">When the crop is fair in the olive-yard,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">And the earthen jars are ready<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the golden oil from the barrels poured,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">And the big cart rocks unsteady<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With its tower of gathered sheaves, and strains<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And groans on its way through fields and lanes;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">When brawny and bare as an old athlete<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Comes Bacchus the dance a-leading,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the labourers all, with juice-dyed feet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The vintage of Crau are treading,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the good wine pours from the brimful presses,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And the ruddy foam in the vats increases;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">When under the leaves of the Spanish broom<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The clear silk-worms are holden,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">An artist each, in a tiny loom,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Weaving a web all golden,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fine, frail cells out of sunlight spun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where they creep and sleep by the million,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Glad is Provence on a day like that,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">’Tis the time of jest and laughter:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Ferigoulet and the Baume Muscat<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">They quaff, and they sing thereafter.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And lads and lasses, their toils between,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dance to the tinkling tambourine.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Methinks, good neighbours, I am Fortune’s pet.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ne’er in my trellised arbor saw I yet<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A silkier bower, cocoons more worthy praise,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or richer harvest, since the year of grace<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When first I laid my hand on Ramoun’s arm<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And came, a youthful bride, to Lotus Farm.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So spake Jano Mario, Ramoun’s wife,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fond, proud mother who had given life<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To our Mirèio. Unto her had hied,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The while were gathered the cocoons outside,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her neighbours. In the silk-worm-room they throng;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, as they aid the picking, gossip long.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">To these Mirèio tendered now and then<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Oak-sprigs and sprays of rosemary; for when<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The worms, lured by the mountain odour, come<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In myriads, there to make their silken home,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sprays and sprigs, adornèd in such wise,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are like the golden palms of Paradise.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“On Mother Mary’s altar yesterday,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Jano Mario said, “I went to lay<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My finer sprays, by way of tithe. And so<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I do each year; for you, my women, know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That, when the holy Mother will, ’tis she<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who sendeth up the worms abundantly.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now, for my part,” said Zèu of Host Farm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Great fears have I my worms will come to harm.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You mind that ugly day the east wind blew,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I left my window open,—if you knew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ever such folly!—and to my affright<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon my floor are twenty, now turned white.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">To Zèu thus the crone Taven replied—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A witch, who from the cliffs of Baux had hied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To help at the cocooning: “Youth is bold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The young think they know better than the old;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And age is torment, and we mourn the fate<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which bids us see and know,—but all too late,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ye are such giddy women, every one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That, if the hatching promise well, ye run<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Straightway about the streets the tale to tell.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Come see my silk-worms! ’Tis incredible<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How fine they are!’ Envy can well dissemble:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She hastens to your room, her heart a-tremble<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“With wrath. And ‘Well done, neighbour!’ she says cheerly:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘This does one good! You’ve still your caul on, clearly!’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But when your head is turned, she casts upon ’em—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The envious one—a look so full of venom,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It knots and burns ’em up. And then you say<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was the east wind plastered ’em that way!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I don’t say that has naught to do with it,”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Quoth Zèu. “Still it had been quite as fit<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For me to close the window.”—“Doubt you, then,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The harm the eye can do,” went on Taven,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“When in the head it glistens balefully?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And Zèu scanned, herself with piercing eye.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ye are such fools, ye seem to think,” she said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“That scraping with a scalpel on the dead<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Would win its honey-secret from the bee!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But may not a fierce look, now answer me,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The unborn babe for evermore deform,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dry the cow’s milk in her udders warm?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“An owl may fascinate a little bird;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A serpent, flying geese, as I have heard,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">How high soe’er they mount. And if one keep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A fixed gaze upon silk-worms, will they sleep?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Moreover, is there, neighbours, in the land<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So wise a virgin that she can withstand<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The fiery eyes of passionate youth?” Here stopped<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hag, and damsels four their cocoons dropped;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“In June as in October,” murmuring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Her tongue hath evermore a barbèd sting,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The ancient viper! What the lads, say you?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let them come, then! We’ll see what they can do?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But other merry ones retorted, “No!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We want them not! Do we, Mirèio?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Not we! Nor is it always cocooning,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So I’ll a bottle from the cellar bring<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That you will find delicious.” And she fled<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toward the house because her cheeks grew red.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now, friends,” said haughty Lauro, with decision,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“This is my mind, though poor be my condition:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll smile on no one, even though my lover<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As king of fairy-land his realm should offer.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A pleasure were it, could I see him lying,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And seven long years before my footstool sighing.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ah!” said Clemenço, “should a king me woo,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And say he loved me, without much ado<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’d grant the royal suit! And chiefly thus<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Were he a young king and a glorious.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A king of men, in beauty, I’d let come<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And freely lead me to his palace home!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But see! If I were once enthronèd there,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A sovereign and an empress, in a fair<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mantle bedecked, of golden-flowered brocade,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With pearls and emeralds dazzling round my head,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then would my heart for my poor country yearn;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And I, the queen, would unto Baux return.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And I would make my capital at Baux,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And on the rock where lie its ruins low<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I would rebuild our ancient castle, and<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A white tower on the top thereof should stand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose head should touch the stars. Thither retiring,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If rest or solace were the queen desiring,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“We’d climb the turret-stair, my prince and I,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And gladly throw the crown and mantle by.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And would it not be blissful with my love,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Aloft, alone to sit, the world above?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or, leaned upon the parapet by his side,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To search the lovely landscape far and wide,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Our own glad kingdom of Provence descrying,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like some great orange-grove beneath us lying<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All fair? And, ever stretching dreamily<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beyond the hills and plains, the sapphire sea;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While noble ships, tricked out with streamers gay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Just graze the Chateau d’If, and pass away?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Or we would turn to lightning-scathed Ventour,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who, while the lesser heights before him cower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His hoary head against the heaven raises,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As I have seen, in solitary places<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of beech and pine, with staff in agèd hand,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Some shepherd-chief, his flock o’erlooking, stand.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Again, we’d follow the great Rhone awhile,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Adown whose banks the cities brave defile,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dip their lips and drink, with dance and song.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stately is the Rhone’s march, and very strong;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But even he must bend at Avignon<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His haughty head to Notre Dame des Doms.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Or watch the ever-varying Durance,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now like some fierce and ravenous goat advance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Devouring banks and bridges; now demure<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As maid from rustic well who bears her ewer,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Spilling her scanty water as she dallies,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And every youth along her pathway rallies.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So spake her sweet Provençal majesty,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And rose with brimful apron, and put by<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her gathered treasure. Two more maids were there,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Twin sisters, the one dark, the other fair,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Azaläis, Viòulano. The stronghold<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of Estoublon sheltered their parents old.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And oft these two to Lotus Farmstead came;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While that mischievous lad, Cupid by name,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who loves to sport with generous hearts and tender,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had made the sisters both their love surrender<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the same youth. So Azaläis said,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The dark one,—lifting up her raven head:<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now, damsels, play awhile that I were queen.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Marseilles ships, the Beaucaire meadows green.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Smiling La Ciotat, and fair Salon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With all her almond trees, to me belong.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then the young maids I’d summon by decree,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From Arles, Baux, Barbentano, unto me.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Come, fly like birds!’ the order should be given;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And I, of these, would choose the fairest seven,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And royal charge upon the same would lay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The false love and the true in scales to weigh.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And then would merry counsel holden be;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For sure it is a great calamity<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“That half of those who love, with love most meet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Can never marry, and their joy complete.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But when I, Azaläis, hold the helm,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I proclamation make, that in my realm<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">True lovers wounded in their cruel sport<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall aye find mercy at the maiden’s court.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And if one sell her robe of honour white,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whether it be for gold or jewel bright,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And if one offer insult, or betray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A fond heart, unto such as these alway<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The high court of the seven maids shall prove<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The stern avenger of offended love.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And if two lovers the same maid desire,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or if two maids to the same lad aspire,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My council’s duty it shall be to choose<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which loves the better, which the better sues,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And which is worthier of a happy fate.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Moreover, on my maidens there shall wait<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Seven sweet poets, who from time to time<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall write the laws of love in lovely rhyme<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon wild vine-leaves or the bark of trees;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And sometimes, in a stately chorus, these<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Will sing the same, and then their couplets all<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like honey from the honey-comb will fall.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So, long ago, the whispering pines among,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Faneto de Gautèume may have sung,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When she the glory of her star-crowned head<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On Roumanin and on the Alpines shed;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or Countess Dio, of the passionate lays,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who held her courts of love in the old days.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But now Mirèio, to the room returning,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With face as radiant as an Easter morning,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A flagon bore; and, for their spirits’ sake,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Besought them all her beverage to partake:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For this will make us work with heartier will;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So come, good women, and your goblets fill!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then, pouring from the wicker-covered flask<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A generous drink for whosoe’er might ask,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">(A string of gold the falling liquor made),<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I mixed this cordial mine own self,” she said:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“One leaves it in a window forty days,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That it may mellow in the sun’s hot rays.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Herein are mountain herbs, in number three.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The liquor keeps their odour perfectly:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It strengthens one.” Here brake in other voices:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Listen, Mirèio! Tell us what your choice is;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For these have told what they would do, if they<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Were queens, or came to great estate one day.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“In such a case, Mirèio, what would you?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Who, I? How can I tell what I would do?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I am so happy in our own La Crau<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With my dear parents, wherefore should I go?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Ah, ha!” outspake another maiden bold:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Little care you for silver or for gold.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But on a certain morn, I mind it well,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Forgive me, dear, that I the tale should tell!—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twas Tuesday: I had gathered sticks that day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, fagot on my hip, had won my way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Almost to La Crous-Blanco, when I ’spied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You in a tree, with some one by your side<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Who chatted gayly. A lithe form he had”—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Whence did he come?” they cried. “Who was the lad?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Said Noro, “To tell that were not so easy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Because among the thick-leaved mulberry-trees he<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was hidden half; yet think I ’twas the clever<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vincen, the Valabregan basket-weaver!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh!” cried the damsels all, with peals of laughter,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“See you not what the little cheat was after?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A pretty basket she would fain receive,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And made this poor boy in her love believe!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The fairest maiden the whole country over<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Has chosen the barefoot Vincen for her lover!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So mocked they, till o’er each young countenance<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In turn there fell a dark and sidelong glance,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Taven’s,—who cried, “A thousand curses fall<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon you, and the vampire seize you all!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">If the good Lord from heaven this way came,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You girls, I think, would giggle all the same.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Tis brave to laugh at this poor lad of osiers;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But mark! the future may make strange disclosures,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Poor though he be. Now hear the oracle!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">God in his house once wrought a miracle;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And I can show the truth of what I say,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For, lasses, it all happened in my day.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Once, in the wild woods of the Luberon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A shepherd kept his flock. His days were long;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But when at last the same were well-nigh spent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And toward the grave his iron frame was bent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He sought the hermit of Saint Ouquèri,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To make his last confession piously.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Alone, in the Vaumasco valley lost,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His foot had never sacred threshold crost,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Since he partook his first communion.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Even his prayers were from his memory gone;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But now he rose and left his cottage lowly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And came and bowed before the hermit holy.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>With what sin chargest thou thyself, my brother?’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The solitary said. Replied the other,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The aged man, ‘Once, long ago, I slew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A little bird about my flock that flew,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A cruel stone I flung its life to end:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was a wagtail, and the shepherds’ friend.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">‘</span>Is this a simple soul,’ the hermit thought,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Or is it an impostor?’ And he sought<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Right curiously to read the old man’s face<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until, to solve the riddle, ‘Go,’ he says,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘And hang thy shepherd’s cloak yon beam upon,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And afterward I will absolve my son.’<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“A single sunbeam through the chapel strayed;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And there it was the priest the suppliant bade<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To hang his cloak! But the good soul arose,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And drew it off with mien of all repose,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And threw it upward. And it hung in sight<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Suspended on the slender shaft of light!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Then fell the hermit prostrate on the floor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Oh, man of God!’ he cried, and he wept sore,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">‘Let but the blessed hand these tears bedew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fulfil the sacred office for us two!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No sins of thine can I absolve, ’tis clear:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thou art the saint, and I the sinner here!’<span class="lftspc">”</span><br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Her story ended, the crone said no more;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But all the laughter of the maids was o’er.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Only Laureto dared one little joke:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“This tells us ne’er to laugh at any cloak!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Good may the beast be, although rough the hide;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, girls, methought young mistress I espied<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Grow crimson as an autumn grape, because<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vincen’s dear name so lightly uttered was.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">There’s mystery here! Mirèio, we are jealous!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lasted the picking long that day? Pray, tell us!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">When two friends meet, the hour is winged with pleasure;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, for a lover, one has always leisure!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Oh, fie!” Mirèio said. “Enough of joking!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mind your work now, and be not so provoking!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You would make swear the very saints! But I<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Promise you one and all, most faithfully,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll seek a convent while my years are tender,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sooner than e’er my maiden heart surrender!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then brake the damsels into merry chorus:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Have we not pretty Magali before us?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who love and lovers held in such disdain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That, to escape their torment, she was fain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To Saint Blasi’s in Arles away to hie,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bury her sweet self from every eye.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Come, Noro, you, whose voice is ever thrilling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who charm us all, sing now, if you are willing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The song of Magali, the cunning fairy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who love had shunned by all devices airy.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A bird, a vine, a sunbeam she became,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet fell herself, love’s victim all the same!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Queen of my soul!” sang Noro, and the rest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fell straightway to their work with twofold zest;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And as, when one cicala doth begin<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Its high midsummer note, the rest fall in<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And swell the chorus, so the damsels here<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sang the refrain with voices loud and clear:—<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Magali, queen of my soul,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The dawn is near!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hark to my tambourine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hide not thy bower within,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Open and hear!<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The sky is full of stars,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">And the wind soft;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, when thine eyes they see,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The stars, O Magali,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Will pale aloft!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Idle as summer breeze<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The tune thou playest!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll vanish in the sea,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A silver eel will be,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Ere thou me stayest.”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If thou become an eel,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">And so forsake me,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I will turn fisher too<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And fish the water blue<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Until I take thee!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“In vain with net or line<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Thou me implorest:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll be a bird that day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wing my trackless way<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Into the forest!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If thou become a bird,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">And so dost dare me,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I will a fowler be,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And follow cunningly<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Until I snare thee!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“When thou thy cruel snare<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Settest full surely,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I will a flower become,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in my prairie home<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Hide me securely!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If thou become a flower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Before thou thinkest<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll be a streamlet clear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the water bear<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">That thou, love, drinkest!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“When thou, a stream, dost feed<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The flower yonder,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I will turn cloud straightway,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And to America<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Away I’ll wander.”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Though thou to India<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Fly from thy lover,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Still I will follow thee:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I the sea-breeze will be<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">To waft thee over!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I can outstrip the breeze<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Fast as it flieth:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll be the swift sun-ray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That melts the ice away<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">And the grass drieth!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Sunlight if thou become,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Are my wiles ended?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll be a lizard green,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And quaff the golden sheen<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">To make me splendid!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Be thou a Triton, hid<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">In the dark sedges!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’m the moon by whose ray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fairies and witches pay<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Their mystic pledges!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If thou the moon wilt be<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Sailing in glory,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll be the halo white<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hovering every night<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Around and o’er thee!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yet shall thy shadowy arm<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Embrace me never!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I will turn virgin rose,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all my thorns oppose<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">To thee for ever!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If thou become a rose,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Vain too shall this be!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Seest thou not that I,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As a bright butterfly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Freely may kiss thee?”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Urge, then, thy mad pursuit:<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Idly thou’lt follow!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll in the deep wood bide;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll in the old oak hide,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Gnarlèd and hollow.”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“In the dim forest glade<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Wilt thou be hidden?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll be the ivy-vine,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And my long arms entwine<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Round thee unbidden!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Fold thine arms tightly, then:<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Clasp the oak only!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’ll a white sister be!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Far off in St. Blasi,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Secure and lonely!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Be thou a white-veiled nun<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Come to confession,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I will be there as priest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thee freely to divest<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Of all transgression!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The startled women their cocoons let fall.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Noro, make haste!” outspake they one and all:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“What could our hunted Magali answer then?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A nun, poor dear, who had already been<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A cloud, a bird, a fish, an oak, a flower,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sun, the moon, the stream, in one short hour?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ah, yes!” said Noro, “I the rest will sing:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She was, I think, the cloister entering;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And that mad fowler dared to promise her<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He would in the confessional appear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And shrive her. Therefore hear what she replies:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The maid hath yet another last device:”—<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Enter the sacred house!<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">I shall be sleeping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Robed in a winding-sheet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nuns at my head and feet,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Above me weeping.”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“If thou wert lifeless dust,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">My toils were o’er:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I’d be the yawning grave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thee in my arms to have<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">For evermore!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now know I thou art true,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">Leave me not yet!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Come, singer fair, and take,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And wear it for my sake,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">This annulet!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Look up, my blessed one,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">The heaven scan!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Since the stars came to see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thee, O my Magali,<br/></span>
						<span class="i2">They are turned wan!”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A silence fell, the sweet song being ended:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Only with the last moving notes had blended<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The voices of the rest. Their heads were drooping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As they before the melody were stooping,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like slender reeds that lean and sway for ever<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before the flowing eddies of a river.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Till Noro said, “Now is the air serene;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And here the mowers come, their scythes to clean<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Beside the vivary brook. Mirèio, dear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bring us a few St. John’s Day apples here.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And we will add a little new-made cheese,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And take our lunch beneath the lotus-trees.”<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
