<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Witch</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The merry birds, until the white dawn showeth<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Clear in the east, are silent every one.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Silent the odorous Earth until she knoweth<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In her warm heart the coming of the Sun,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As maiden in her fairest robes bedight<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Breathless awaits her lover and her flight.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Across La Crau three swineherds held their way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From St. Chamas the wealthy, whither they<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had to the market gone. Their herds were sold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And o’er their shoulders pouches full of gold<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Were hung, and by their hanging cloaks concealed:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So, chatting idly, they attained the field<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Of the late strife. Suddenly one cried, “Hush!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Comrades, I hear a moaning in the bush.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“<span class="lftspc">’</span>Tis but a tolling bell,” the rest averred,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“From Saint Martin’s or from Maussano heard,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or the north wind the dwarf-oak limbs a-swaying.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, ere they spake, all were their steps delaying,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Arrested by so piteous a groan<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It rent the very heart. And every one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Cried, “Holy Jesus! Here has been foul play!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then crossed themselves, and gently took their way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Toward the sound. Ah, what a sight there was!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Vincen, supine upon the stony grass,—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The grass blood-stained, the trampled earth besprent<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With willow rods. His shirt to ribbons rent,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stabbed in the breast, left on the moor alone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had lain the poor lad through the night now gone,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With but the stars to watch. But the dim ray<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of early dawn, as ebbed his life away,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Falling upon his lids had oped them wide.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Straightway the good Samaritans turned aside<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From their home-path, stooped, and a hammock made<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of their three cloaks, thereon the victim laid,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then bare him tenderly upon their arms<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the nearest door,—the Lotus-Farm’s....<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">O friends,—Provençal poets brave and dear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who love my songs of other days to hear!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You, Roumanille, who blend with songs you sing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Tears, girlish laughter, and the breath of spring;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And you, proud Aubanel, who stray where quiver<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The changing lights and shades of wood and river,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">To soothe a heart oppressed by love’s fond dream;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You, Crousillat, who your belovèd stream,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bright Touloubro, make more truly famous<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Than did the grim star-gazer Nostradamus;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And you, Anselme, who see, half-sad, half-smiling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fair girls under the trellised arbours whiling<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Their hours away; and you, my Paul, the witty,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And peasant Tavan, who attune your ditty<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Unto the crickets’ chirrup, while you peer<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wistful at your poor pickaxe; and most dear,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Adolphe Dumas, who when Durance is deep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With his spring flood, come back your thoughts to steep,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And warm the Frenchman at Provençal suns,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twas you who met my own Mirèio once<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At your great Paris,—met her tenderly,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where she had flown, impetuous, daring, shy;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And last Garcin, brave son of a brave sire,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whose soul mounts upward on a wind of fire;—<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Upbear me with your holy breath as now<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">I climb for the fair fruit on that high bough!...<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The swineherds paused at Master Ramoun’s door,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Crying, “Good-morrow! Yonder, on the moor,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We found this poor lad wounded in the breast.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Twere well that his sore hurt were quickly drest.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">So laid their burden on the broad, flat stone.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They tell Mirèio, to the garden gone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To gather fruit, who, basket on her side,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fled wildly to the spot. Thither, too, hied<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The labourers all; but she, her basket falling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stretched forth her hands on Mother Mary calling.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Vincen is bleeding! Ah, what have they done?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, lovingly, the head of the dear one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She lifted, turned, and long and mutely gazed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As though with horror and with grief amazed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her large tears dropping fast. And well he knows<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That tender touch to be Mirèio’s,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And faintly breathes, “Pity, and pray for me,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Because I need the good God’s company!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Your parched throat moisten with this cordial. Strive<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To drink,” old Ramoun said: “you will revive.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The maiden seized the cup, and drop by drop<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She made him drink, and spake to him of hope<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Till his pain lulled. “May God keep you alway<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From such distress, and your sweet care repay!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Said Vincen; and the brave boy would not tell<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It was for her sake that he fought and fell;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But “Splitting osier on my breast,” he said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The sharp knife slipped, and pierced me.” Therewith strayed<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">His thought back to his love as bee to flower.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The anguish on thy face, dear, in this hour<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is far more bitter than my wound to me.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The pretty basket that in company<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We once began will be unfinished now.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Would I had seen it full to overflow,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Dear, with thy love! Oh, stay! Life’s in thine eyes.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ah, if thou couldst do something,” the lad cries,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“For him,—the poor old basket-weaver there,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My father, worn with toil!” In her despair,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mirèio bathes the wound, while some bring lint,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And some run to the hills for healing mint.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then the maid’s mother spake: “Let four men rally,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And to the Fairies’ Cavern, in the valley<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They call Enfer, bear up this wounded man.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The deadlier the hurt, the sooner can<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The old witch heal. Scale first the cliffs of Baux,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And circling vultures the cave’s mouth will show.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A hole flush with the rocks, by lizards haunted,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And veiled by tufts of rosemary thereby planted.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For ever, since the holy Angelus swells,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In Mary’s honour from the minster-bells,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The antique fairies have been forced to hide<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From sunlight, and in this deep cavern bide.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Strange, airy things, they used to flit about<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dimly, ’twixt form and substance, in and out:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Half-earthly made, to be the visible<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Spirit of Nature; female made as well,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To tame the savagery of primal men.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But these were fair in fairies’ eyes, and then<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">They loved: and so, infatuate, lifted not<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mortals unto their own celestial lot;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, lusting, fell into our low estate,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As birds fall, whom a snake doth fascinate,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">From their high places. But, while thus I write,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bearers have borne Vincen up the height.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">A dim, straight passage led the cavern toward,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A rocky funnel where they gently lowered<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sufferer; and he did not go alone,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet was Mirèio’s self the only one<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who dared to follow down that awesome road,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Commending, as she went, his soul to God.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The bottom gained, they found a grotto cold<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And vast; midway whereof a beldam old,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The witch Taven, sat silent, crouching lowly<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As lost in thought and utter melancholy,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Holding a sprig of brome, and muttering,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Some call thee devil’s wheat, poor little thing,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Yet art thou one of God’s own signs for good!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Therewith Mirèio, trembling where she stood,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Was fain to tell why they had sought her thus.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I knew it!” cried the witch, impervious,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The brome addressing still, with bended head.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Thou poor field-flower! The trampling flock,” she said,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Browse on thy leaves and stems the whole year long;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But all the more thou spreadest and art strong,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And north and south with verdure deckest yet.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She ceased. A dim light, in a snail-shell set,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Danced o’er the dank rock-wall in lurid search:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here hung a sieve; there, on a forkèd perch,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Roosted a raven, a white hen beside.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Suddenly, as if drunken, rose and cried<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The witch, “And what care I whoe’er you be?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Faith walketh blindfold, so doth Charity,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor from her even tenor wandereth.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Say, Valabregan weaver, have you faith?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“I have.” Then wildly, their pursuit inviting,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like a she-wolf her flanks with her tail smiting,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Darted the hag into a deeper shaft,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While the fowl cackled and the raven laughed<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Before her footsteps; and the boy and maid<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Followed her through the darkness, sore afraid.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Stay not!” she cried. “The time is now to find<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mystic mandrake.” And, with hands entwined,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Obedient to the voice the two crept on,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Through the infernal passage, till they won<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A grotto larger than the rest. “Lo! now,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lord Nostradamus’ plant, the golden bough,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The staff of Joseph and the rod of Moses!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thus crying, Taven a slender shrub discloses,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, kneeling, with her chaplet crowns. Then said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Arising, “We too must be garlanded<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With mandrake;” and the plant in the rock’s cleft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of three fair sprays mysteriously bereft,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Herself crowned first, and next the wounded man,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And last the maid. Then, crying, “Forward!” ran<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Down the weird way, before her footsteps lit<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By shining beetles trooping over it.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet turned with a sage word,—“All paths of glory,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My children, have their space of purgatory!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Therefore have courage! for we must, alas!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The terrors of the Sabatori pass.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, while she spake, their faces cut they find,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And breathing stopped, by rush of keenest wind.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Lie down!” she whispered hurriedly,—“lie low!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The triumph of the Whirlwind Sprites is now!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then fell upon them, like a sudden gale<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or white squall on the water fraught with hail,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A swarm of whirling, yelping, vicious things,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under the fanning of whose icy wings<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The mortals, drenched with sweat and struck with cold,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stood shivering. “Away, ye over-bold,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Ye spoilers of the harvest, unlicked whelps!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Taven exclaimed. “Must we then use such helps<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To the fair deeds we do? Yet, as by skill<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The sage physician bringeth good from ill,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We witches, by our hidden arts, compel<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Evil to yield its fruit of good as well.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Naught’s hid from us. For where the vulgar see<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A stone, a whip, a stag, a malady,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We witches can the inner force divine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like that which works under the scum of wine<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In fermentation. Pierce the vat, you know,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A seething, boiling scum will outward flow.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Find, if you can, the key of Solomon!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or speak unto the mountain in its own<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Dread language! It shall move at your behest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And roll into the valley ere it rest.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Meanwhile they wended lower, and were ’ware<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of a small, roguish voice a-piping there,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Most like a goldfinch: “Our good granny spins,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And winds and spins, and then anew begins,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And thinks that she spins worsted night and day,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And ha! ha! gossip, she spins only hay!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Te! he! spin, Aunty, spin!” And long-drawn laughter,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like whinnying of young colts, followed thereafter.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Why, what can that be?” asked Mirèio,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“The little voice that laughs and jeers us so?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Again the childish treble came, “Te! he!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who is this pretty mortal? Let us see!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">We’ll raise the neckerchief a little bit:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are nuts and pomegranates under it?”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Then the poor maid had nearly cried outright;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But the hag stayed her, “Here’s no cause for fright.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The singing, jeering thing is but a Glari:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fantasti is his name, a sprightly fairy.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In his good mood he will your kitchen sweep,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mind fire, turn roast, and a full hen’s-nest keep.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But what a marplot when he takes the whim!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He’ll salt your broth just as it pleaseth him,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or blow your light out ere you’re half in bed!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Or, if to vespers you would go,” she said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“At Saint Trophime, in all your best bedight,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He’ll hide your Sunday suit, or spoil it quite!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Hear!” shrieked the imp: “now hear the old hag talk!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">’Tis like the creak of an ill-greasèd block!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No doubt, my withered olive,” the thing said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“I twitch the bedclothes off a sleeping maid<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Sometimes at midnight, and she starts with fear<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And trembles, and her breast heaves. Oh, I see her!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And with its whinnying laugh the sprite was gone;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then, for a brief space, as they journeyed on<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under the grots, the witcheries were stayed;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And in the gloomy silence, long delayed,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They heard the water drop from vaulted roof<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To crystal ground. Now there had sat aloof,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Upon a ledge of rock, a tall, white thing,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Which rose in the half-light as menacing<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With one long arm. Then stiff as a quartz rock<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Stood Vincen; while, transported by the shock,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Mirèio would have leaped a precipice,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Had such been there. “Old scare-crow, what is this?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“What mean you,” cried Taven, “by swaying so<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your limp head like a poplar to and fro?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then turning to the stricken twain, “My dears,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">You know the Laundress? Oft-times she appears<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On Mount Ventour, and then the common crowd<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Are wont to take her for a long, white cloud.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“But shepherds, when they see her, pen their sheep.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The Laundress of destruction, who doth keep<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The errant clouds in hand, is known too well.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She scrubs them with a strength right terrible;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Wringing out buckets full of rain, and flame.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And neatherds house their cattle at her name;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And seamen, on the angry, tossing wave,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon our Lady call, their craft to save.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here drowned her speech a discord most appalling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rattling of latches, whimpering, caterwauling,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">With uncouth words half-uttered intervening,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Whereof the devil only knows the meaning;<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And brazen din through all the cave resounding,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As one were on a witch-caldron pounding.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Then whence those shrieks of laughter, and those wails<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">As of a woman in her pains? Prevails<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hardly amid the howl the beldam’s speech,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Give me a hand that I may hold you each,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And let your magic garlands not be lost!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here were they jostled from their feet almost<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By rush of something puffing, grunting, snorting,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Most like a herd of ghostly swine comporting.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On starlit winter-nights, when Nature slumbers<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Under her snowy sheets, come forth in numbers<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The fowlers, torch in hand, who bush and tree<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">By river-side will beat right vigorously,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Till all the birds at roost arise in haste,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, as by breath of smithy-bellows chased,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Affrighted, rush until the net receive:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So drave Taven the foul herd with her sieve<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Into the outer darkness. With the same<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She circles traced, luminous, red as flame,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And divers other figures. All the while,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Avaunt!” she cried, “ye locusts, ye who spoil<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The harvest! Quit my sight, or woe betide you!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Workers of evil, in your burrows hide you!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Since, by the pricking of your flesh, ye know<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hills are still with sunshine all aglow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Go hang yourselves again on the rock-angles,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ye bats!” They flit. The clamour disentangles,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And dies away. Then to the children spake<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The witch: “All birds of night themselves betake<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“To this retreat what time shines the daylight<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">On the ploughed land and fallow; but at night,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">At night the lamps are lighted without hand<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">In churches void and triply fastened, and<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The bells toll of themselves, and pavement stones<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upstart, and tremble all the buried bones,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And the poor dead arise and kneel to pray,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And mass is said by priests as pale as they.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Ask the owls else, who clamber down the steeple<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To drain the lamps of oil; and if the people<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who thus partake of the communion<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Be not all dead except the priests alone!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“What time the beldam jeers at February,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Let women everywhere be wondrous wary,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nor fall asleep on chairs for awful reason!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shepherds as well, at yon uncanny season<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Early your charges fold, and it mislike you<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A spell should motionless and rigid strike you<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“For seven years’ time. The Fairies’ Cavern, too,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Looses about these days its eerie crew.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Winged or four-footed, they o’er Crau disperse;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While, from their lairs aroused, the sorcerers<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gather, the <i>farandoulo</i> dance, and sup<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">An evil potion from a golden cup.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The dwarf-oaks dance as well. Lord, how they trip it!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Meanwhile there’s Garamaude in wait for Gripet.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fie, cruel flirt! Ay, seize the carrion,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And claw her bowels out! Now they are gone,—<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Nay, but they come again! And, oh, despair!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The monster stealing through the sea-kale there,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“The one who like a burglar crouched and ran,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is Bambarouche, babe-stealing harridan.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Her wailing prey in her long claw she takes,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lifts on her horny head, and off she makes.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And yon’s another! She’s the Nightmare-sprite<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Comes down the chimney-flue at dead of night,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And stealthy climbs upon the sleeper’s breast,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who, as with weight of a tall tower opprest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Hath horrid dreams. Hi! What a hideous racket!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">My dears, ’tis the foul-weather fiends who make it!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That sound of rusty hinges, groaning doors,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is they who beat up fog upon the moors,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And ride the winds that homestead-roofs uptear<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And bear afar. Ha, Moon! What ails you there?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">What dire indignity hath made you scowl<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">So red and large o’er Baux? ’Ware the dog’s howl!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yon dog can snap you like a cake, be sure!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">He minds the filthy Demon of the Sewer!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Now see the holm-oaks bend their heads like ferns,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And see that flame that leaps and writhes and burns.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">It is St. Elmo’s. And that ringing sound<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Of rapid hoofs upon the stony ground<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is the wild huntsman riding over Crau.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here hoarse and breathless paused the witch of Baux.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">But straight thereafter, “Cover ears and eyes,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">For the black lamb is bleating!” wildly cries.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“That baaing lambkin!” Vincen dared to say;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But she, “Hide eyes and ears without delay!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Woe to the stumbler here! Sambuco’s Path<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Less peril than the black horn’s passage hath.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Tender his bleating, as you hear, and soft:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thereby he lures to their destruction oft<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The heedless Christians who attend his moan.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To them he shows the sheen of Herod’s throne,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The gold of Judas, and the fatal spot<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where Saracens made fast the golden goat.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Her they may milk till death, to hearts’ content.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But, when they call for their last sacrament,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The black lamb only buts them savagely.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And yet, so evil is the time,” quoth she,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Unnumbered greedy souls that bait will seize,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Burn incense unto gold, then die as these!”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Now, while the white hen gave three piercing crows,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The eerie guide did to her guests disclose<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The thirteenth grotto, and the last; and lo!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A huge, wide chimney and a hearth aglow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And seven black tom-cats warming round the flame;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, hanging from a hook above the same,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">An iron caldron of gigantic size,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And underneath two fire-brands, dragon-wise<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Belching blue flame. “Is it with these you brew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Grandmother,” asked the lad, “your magic stew?”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“With these, my son. They’re branches of wild vine:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">No better logs for burning be than mine.”<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Well, call them branches if it be your taste;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">But—but I may not jest. Haste, mother, haste!”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Now, midway of the grotto, they descry<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A large, round table of red porphyry;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, radiating from this wondrous place,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Lower than root of oak or mountain base,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Infinite aisles whose gleaming columns cluster<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Like pendant icicles in shape and lustre.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">These are the far-famed galleries of the fays,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Here evermore a hazy brightness plays,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Temples and shining palaces are here,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Majestic porticoes their fronts uprear,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And many a labyrinth and peristyle<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The like whereof was never seen erewhile,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Even in Corinth or in Babylon.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Yet let a fairy breathe, and these are gone!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And here, like flickering rays of light, disperse<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Through he dim walks of this serene Chartreuse,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">The fairies with their knights long since enchanted.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Peace to the aisles by their fair presence haunted!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now the witch was ready. First of all,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She lifted high her hands, then let them fall,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While Vincen had like holy Lawrence lain<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Upon the porphyry table, mute with pain.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And mightily the spirit of the crone<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Appeared to work within her; and as grown<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She seemed, when, rising to her height anew,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She plunged her ladle in the boiling stew<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">That overflowed the caldron in the heat,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">While all the cats arose and ringed her feet,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">And, with her left hand, unto Vincen’s breast<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Applied the scalding drops with solemn zest,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gazing intently on him where he lay,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Until the cruel hurt was charmed away;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And all the while, “The Lord is born, is dead,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is risen, shall rise again,” she murmurèd.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Last on the quivering flesh the cross she made<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Thrice with her toe-nail; as in forest glade<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A tigress fiercely claws her fallen prey.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And now her speech maketh tumultuous way<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To where the dim gates of the future are.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Yea, he shall rise! I see him now afar<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Amid the stones and thistles of the hill,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">His forehead bleeding heavily. And still<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Over the stones and briers he makes his way,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Bowed by his cross. Where is Veronica<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To wipe the blood? And him of Cyrene<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To stay him when he fainteth,—where is he?<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And where the weeping Maries, hair dishevelled?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">All gone! And rich and poor, before him levelled,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Gaze while he mounts; and ‘Who is this,’ one saith,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Who climbs with shouldered beam, and never stayeth?’<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">O carnal sons of men! The Cross-bearer<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Is unto you but as a beaten cur.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“O cruel Jews! Wherefore so fiercely bite you<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">The hands that feed, and lick the hands that smite you?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Receive the fruit of your foul deeds you must.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Your precious gems shall crumble into dust,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And that you deemed fair pulse or wholesome wheat<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall turn to ashes even while you eat,<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“And scare your very hunger. Woe is me!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rivers that foam o’er carrion-heaps I see,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And swords and lances in tumultuous motion.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Peace to thy stormy waves, thou vexèd Ocean!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Shall Peter’s ancient bark withstand the shock?<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Alas, it strikes upon the senseless rock!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Nay, but there cometh One with power to save!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Fisher of men, he quells the rebel wave.<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">A fair new bark the Rhone is entering now:<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">She hath God’s cross uplifted on her prow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Rainbow divine! Eternal clemency!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Another land, another sun, I see!<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">“Dance olive-pickers, where the fruit is shining;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Drink reapers, on the barley-sheaves reclining!<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Revealed by signs so many, God,” she said,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">“Is in his holy temple worshippèd.”<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">And, stretching forth her hand, the witch of Baux<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pointed the way and bade the children go.<br/></span>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<span class="i0">Light gleamed afar. They haste the ray to follow;<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">They thread their way to the Cordovan Hollow,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Where sun and air await them, and they seem<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">To see Mont Majour’s wrecks, as in a dream,<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Strewn o’er the hill; yet on the sunlit verge<br/></span>
						<span class="i0">Pause for one kiss or ever they emerge.<br/></span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
